                                        WPS5640


Policy Research Working Paper          5640




         Employability and Skill Set of Newly
           Graduated Engineers in India
                       Andreas Blom
                       Hiroshi Saeki




The World Bank
South Asia Region
Education Team
April 2011
Policy Research Working Paper 5640


  Abstract
  Skill shortage remains one of the major constraints to                             taxonomy. In contrast, communication in English has the
  continued growth of the Indian economy. This employer                              smallest skill gap, but remains one of the most demanded
  survey seeks to address this knowledge-gap by answering                            skills by the employers. Although employers across India
  three questions: (i) Which skills do employers consider                            asks for the same set of soft skills, their skill demands
  important when hiring new engineering graduates? (ii)                              differ for Professional Skills across economic sectors,
  How satisfied are employers with the skills of engineering                         company sizes, and regions. These findings suggest that
  graduates? and (iii) In which important skills are the                             engineering education institutions should: (i) seek to
  engineers falling short? The results confirm a widespread                          improve the skill set of graduates; (ii) recognize the
  dissatisfaction with the current graduates—64 percent                              importance of Soft Skills, (iii) refocus the assessments,
  of employers hiring fresh engineering graduates are only                           teaching-learning process, and curricula away from
  somewhat satisfied with the quality of the new hires or                            lower-order thinking skills, such as remembering and
  worse. After classifying all skills by factor analysis, the                        understanding, toward higher-order skills, such as
  authors find that employers perceive Soft Skills (Core                             analyzing and solving engineering problems, as well
  Employability Skills and Communication Skills) to be                               as creativity; and (iv) interact more with employers to
  very important. Skill gaps are particularly severe in the                          understand the particular demand for skills in that region
  higher-order thinking skills ranked according to Bloom’s                           and sector.



  This paper is a product of the Education Team, South Asia Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at ablom@
  worldbank.org and hsaeki@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
           Employability and Skill Set of Newly Graduated Engineers in India1



                                 Andreas Blom and Hiroshi Saeki2




JEL Classification: I23, I25, J23, J24, J28, O15

Keywords: Employability, Skills, Employer Survey, Satisfaction, Engineering, Higher Education,
India




1
  The authors would like to thank the Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI) for
its technical and implementation‘s support of the survey. The authors would like to express their gratitude to
National Project Implementation Unit under the Ministry of Human Resource Development for its
administrative support of the survey. The employer survey was made possible thanks to the FICCI‘s
member companies that kindly responded to the survey. We are also grateful for comments received at the
FICCI Higher Education Summit 2009 and at World Bank presentations. We appreciate comments received
from colleagues notably Patrick Terenzini and Amit Dar.
2
  Andreas Blom (World Bank, ablom@worldbank.org), Hiroshi Saeki (World Bank, hsaeki@worldbank.org)
1. Introduction

Insufficient supply of quality skills is one of the main impediments to further economic
growth in India. The Indian economy grew more than 8% on average over the past 5 years,
including the year of the unprecedented financial crisis in 2009. However, the skill
shortage is still one of the major constraints in most industries in India (World Bank,
2009b).

IT, infrastructure and power sectors where engineers play a critical role are particularly in
difficult situations when it comes to unmet demand for skills. For instance, the exporting
IT sector reported lack of skills as the most serious obstacle for growth, and salaries rose
15% annually from 2003 to 2006 mainly due to the shortages of qualified workforce
(World Bank, 2009). The road sector also faces severe shortages of qualified manpower.
The sector needs to increase its hiring by at least 2-3 times of the 2008 level where 6,000 –
7,000 fresh engineers and diploma holders joined the road sector workforce (World Bank,
2008). In the power sector, the focus is also on shortages of qualified engineers. The sector
needs more skills and knowledge at all levels of the workforce, particularly considering
the growing concerns over environmental degradation and depletion of conventional
energy sources (Ministry of Power, 2007). According to the widely quoted report by the
National Association of Software and Services Companies (NASSCOM) and McKinsey in
2005, only 25% of the engineering education graduates are employable by a multinational
company. Many employers give concrete examples on the lack of skills of the newly
graduated hires, which the employers link to shortcomings in the education system. Box 1
provides one such case from a large ITES company.

The higher education system has responded to the increased demand for engineers by
massively expanding production of engineers. The number of students enrolled increased
800 percent from 1998 to 2008, (MHRD, 2009). This quantitative expansion is widely
perceived to have led to an average decline in the quality of the students entering, the
teaching and, consequently, the quality of the graduating engineers (Jha et al. 2009).

Despite the gravity of the situation, little research has been conducted to identify the kinds
of skills demanded by employers and measure in which skills graduates meet employers‘
expectation. There is an increasing demand for such information from teachers,
administrators, and policy makers. For example, Government of India is implementing a
program with World Bank co-finance, to improve quality of engineering education and
increase learning outcomes of engineering education graduates. For this program and for
other initiatives, it is critical to identify specific bottlenecks in skills demanded by
employers, and provide detailed information and practical suggestions to overcome the
skill shortages.

With this aim, an Employer Satisfaction Survey was carried out from September to
November 2009 as part of preparation of the Second Phase of Technical Education Quality
Improvement Program (TEQIP-II) initiated by the Government of India and financially
supported by the World Bank. The survey was implemented by a joint team of the
National Project Implementation Unit (NPIU), the Federation of Indian Chambers of

                                                                                            2
Commerce and Industry (FICCI), and the World Bank in consultation with Ministry of
Human Resource Development (MHRD), Government of India.

    Box 1: A Typical Fresh Engineering Graduate Lacking Problem Solving Skill

        To illustrate the typical skill gap we see in fresh engineers, let us take the case of Gopal, who after
 completing his Bachelor‘s degree in Computer Science and Engineering with a good academic track record has
 just joined an IT Services organization. Specifically, this group works on product engineering for a
 semiconductor vendor who is developing highly integrated silicon and supporting software for mobile devices.
 Gopal has undergone about 2 months of refresher training by the organization on software engineering before
 being assigned to the project.
        The Project manager that he reports to is in charge of delivering the layer of platform software, which
 comprises of the Real Time Operating System and the Device Drivers for all the peripherals the mobile device
 will support, to the customer. The project manager assigns to Gopal the task of taking over the development of a
 device driver for one of the simpler peripherals on the device and points him to all the relevant information
 sources. The project manager expects Gopal to work quite independently on the same and complete it with
 minimal assistance given the fact that he has the necessary knowledge from his academic background, and the
 device driver is for the simplest peripheral on the chip.
          On the job, however Gopal begins to flounder. He is first of all quite stymied by the amount of
 information he has to digest in a short span of time. He did not have the skill to filter out and read what was
 really required for the job. The second challenge was his unfamiliarity with handling a large volume of code.
 His academic projects had been quite small, a few hundred lines at most. He did not have the skill to abstract
 out the entire system, and only focus on the interfaces for the device driver he had to develop. The next
 challenge was on the design of the module. He had to pick a design which was not only efficient in the time but
 also efficient in use of system resources as the design is for a mobile device with typically limited memory.
 Last but not the least, the design had to be robust. When it was time to integrate and test the driver, he had to
 really grasp the complexities of debugging an embedded system. Though his own module was quite simple, he
 had to have the big picture of the system. He had to understand how to use the debugging tools and the features
 it provided, to probe the system at the appropriate level. He was once again felt wanting on the required
 problem solving skills to move ahead on the problems encountered.
     If we reflect on this case, it is clear that the academic curriculum had the following lacunae:
         Had not trained Gopal sufficiently on key design skills, especially handling conflicting criteria to be
          met, and problem solving skills, and creative exploration for the same, and
         Had not trained him on handling complexity, and key abstraction skills required to handle it.

    These problems can be traced to:
       Lack of imagination in the construction of laboratory experiments in the academic setting and also
        probably in the evaluation patterns followed,
       Few problem sets (examinations) for students to test design oriented problems which would have given
        students the chance to explore the design space and appreciate the challenges, and
       Little exposure to joint projects with industries to experience complexities in the actual work place and
        prepare students better for a career in the relevant industries.
                                       General Manager, Project Delivery, in a large IT company in India


Specifically, the survey seeks answers the following three questions:

   (i)   Which skills do employers consider important when hiring new engineering
         graduates?
   (ii) How satisfied are employers with the skills of engineering graduates?
   (iii) In which important skills are the engineers falling short?


                                                                                                           3
The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly summarizes similar studies.
Section 3 describes the methodology of the data collection. Section 4 shows descriptive
statistics of survey respondents. Section 5 presents major findings with analysis of the
collected data. Finally, Section 6 summarizes and discusses implications for education
provision and education policy in order to increase employability of engineering graduates.

2. Previous Employer Surveys and Related Literature on Skills

This section reviews a selected set of previous employer surveys and related literature on
skills that guided the design of this employer survey. A number of employer surveys have
been conducted for graduates of different academic disciplines, e.g., business
administration, education, economics, psychology, etc. Many of these surveys aim to
identify which skills are demanded by employers and to examine how the supply of skills
matches labor market demand.3

Noel-Levitz (a higher education consulting firm) and Utah State University developed a
comprehensive and well designed instrument for employer satisfaction surveys. The
objective of the survey was to measure the employer satisfaction for benchmarking
purposes (Kleinke, 2006). Seventeen universities participated in the survey in 2004. A
survey instrument was mailed to 297 employers of the graduates, of which 112 employers
responded (38% response rate). The questionnaire focused on graduates‘ knowledge and
understanding within: the field of the graduates‘ major, general skills, and specialized
skills. Employers rated graduates‘ knowledge and skills on a five-point scale in two
aspects: satisfaction with the specific skills of the graduate and the importance of each of
those skills. The survey found that employers were on average ―very satisfied‖ with the
knowledge and skills of the graduates (average rating of 4.0 on a five point scale). The
survey instrument was found useful especially in that it asked both importance and
satisfaction levels of knowledge and skills. This structure was incorporated in our survey
instrument.
Lattuca, Terenzini, and Volkwein, 2006, assessed the impact of accreditation based upon
student learning outcomes as introduced by the Accreditation Board for Engineering and
Technology (ABET) in the mid-1990s. The expected student learning outcomes of both
ABET and the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) in India are similar due to common
membership of the so-called Washington Accord, which mutually recognizes engineering
degrees across 12 member-countries, (Washington Accord, 2007). Since many questions
in our employer survey were drawn from the NBA‘s learning outcomes, our survey results
are to some extent comparable with the above study‘s outcomes. Lattuca, Terenzini and
Volkwein surveyed 1,622 employers. The employers were asked information on their
characteristics and three basic issues: (i) the preparation of recent engineering graduates,
(ii) whether or not the skills of the graduates had increased, and (iii) the importance
employers attach to each of the 11 EC2000 learning outcomes. The study found that the
majority of employers agreed that, overall, graduates were adequately or well prepared for


3
 In this paper, we use the term ―skills‖ in the broadest interpretation. Hence, it is not limited to skills of a
routine nature related to a specific trade, but covers broadly and includes what some studies labels
competences, personal attributes, personal characteristics and abilities of both cognitive and
affective/interpersonal nature.
                                                                                                              4
the profession. Further, many employers reported that the skill set of the recently hired
graduates had improved compared to those in 1990s, in particular for so-called soft skills.

Academy for Education Development (AED) carried out an employer survey in Egypt,
with the objective of providing recommendations to the Ministry of Higher Education on
how to improve the quality of Middle Technical Colleges graduates (AED, 2008). A
sample of 240 companies was selected based on stratified sampling technique (by size:
small, medium, and large). AED sent surveyors to companies for personal interviews. 92
companies fully completed the survey questionnaire (38% response rate). The survey
found that the level of skills demanded by employers had increased, mainly because: (i)
higher levels of technology, (ii) increasing competition, and (iii) increasing concerns about
quality of products. The survey also indicated that companies prioritize ―soft skills‖
including personality (honesty, punctuality, etc) and what they labeled ―basic skills‖
(literacy, problem solving, management, etc). The AED‘s employer survey was especially
helpful for our employer satisfaction survey to determine relevant questions of employer
characteristics. Data availability on employers‘ characteristics enabled us to scrutinize the
survey results disaggregated by employers‘ characteristics.
In addition to the survey instruments above, we refer to several papers applying different
analytical tools on data from employer surveys. Paranto and Kelker (1999) analyzed
employers‘ satisfaction with job skills of business college graduates in a regional
university in the US. They examined which skills employers perceived important when
hiring business graduates. 346 employers were identified for the survey by the
university‘s placement office. They are mostly in rural areas in the upper Midwest of the
US, and hired business graduates during the 1990-94 period. 136 employers responded
(39% response rates). By using factor analysis, 18 variables (skills) were reduced to four
major factors, namely specific skills, core skills, personal characteristics, and
communication skills (See Table 1).

                              Table 1: Skills under Four Factors
    Specific Skills             Core Skills               Personal       Communication Skills
                                                       Characteristics
 Database knowledge       Self confidence         Business ethics      Listening skills
 Spreadsheet              Critical thinking       Professionalism      Speaking skills
  knowledge                Creative thinking                             Written
 Word processing          Interpersonal skills                           communication
  knowledge                Leadership skills
 Ability to adapt to      Experience with real
  changing technology       world problems
 Technical skills
 Mathematical skills


A t-test revealed that the mean importance rating of the ―Core Skills‖ is statistically
significantly higher than that of ―Specific Skills‖. In addition, analysis of variance showed
that there is no statistically significant difference in the importance of ―core skills‖ among
employers of different size and different economic sectors. Hence, the survey shows that
the importance of ―Core Skills‖ cuts across all participating firms. Paranto and Kelker

                                                                                              5
 recommended business schools that they should improve effectiveness of business
 programs, by putting more emphasis on ―Core Skills‖.

 Hill and Petty (1995) conducted a similar analysis but focused on occupational work ethics.
 By using factor analysis, forty eight skills were grouped into four factors: interpersonal
 skills, initiative, being dependable, and ―reversed items on instrument‖ (See Table 2). The
 last factor was interpreted as negative perceptions, in which there are (lack of) skills such
 as irresponsible, careless, selfish, etc. The study recommended that school curriculum
 should address the four factors to make student skills more relevant to the workplace.



                            Table 2: Work Ethics under Four Factors

Factor 1: Interpersonal Skills   Factor 2: Initiative   Factor 3: Being Dependable   Factor 4: Reversed Items
 Courteous                       perceptive            following directions        hostile
 friendly                        productive            following regulations       rude
 cheerful                        resourceful           dependable                  selfish
 considerate                     initiating            reliable                    devious
 pleasant                        ambitious             careful                     irresponsible
 cooperative                     efficient             honest                      careless
 helpful                         effective             punctual                    negligent
 likeable                        enthusiastic                                       depressed
 devoted                         dedicated                                          tardy
 loyal                           persistent                                         apathetic
 well groomed                    accurate
 patient                         conscientious
 appreciative                    independent
 hard working                    adaptable
 modest                          persevering
 emotionally stable              orderly
 stubborn

 These prior works guided us in developing the survey methodology analysis for this
 employer survey in India.

 3. Survey Methodology

 FICCI and World Bank conducted an on-line employer satisfaction survey from
 September to November, 2009. 157 employers across sectors and regions in India fully
 completed the questionnaire. The questionnaire (Annex 3) has a list of skills that
 engineering graduates are typically expected to possess at graduation. Employers were
 requested to rate on a scale from 1 (not at all) to 5 (extremely) how important each skill is
 for an engineering graduate to be an effective employee, (Importance Level). The survey
 also asked employers to rate their satisfaction level with regard to each of the skills,
 (Satisfaction Level).



                                                                                                  6
 3.1 Sample Size and Sampling Strategy

Originally, a stratified random sampling from FICCI‘s member database of over 3,000
firms was considered for the Employer Satisfaction Survey. Sample size was calculated
based on the following formula.

       z 2 pq
n 
         e2

where n is the sample size. A 90% confidence interval with margin of error 0.05 was
applied. z is the abscissa of the normal curve that cuts off at a given significance level, i.e.,
1.65, p (in this case 0.6) is the estimated proportion of an attribute that is present in the
population, q is 1-p, and e is the desired level of precision, i.e., 0.05. Using this formula,
the originally estimated sample size was about 260, and it was further proportionately
allocated to FICCI‘s classification of 17 economic sectors.

There were several difficulties in sampling. First, although the sampling method was
originally a stratified random sampling, some member companies were directly contacted
to participate in the survey, due to a low response rate (convenience sampling). This may
have introduced a bias in the representativeness of the sample. Second, the web-based
survey was opened in the last few weeks of the survey to all companies that registered.
This slightly increased the sample size. This self-selection could also have caused a
selection bias. Third, the sample size was not large enough to meet a 90% confidence
interval. Due to time constraints, it was reduced from 260 to 157 companies, i.e., an 80%
confidence interval with a margin of error of 0.05.

Despite these shortcomings, the study brings value since it is the first of its kind in India.
Further, the participation number of 157 is comparable to other employer satisfaction
surveys. The employer satisfaction survey is expected to be conducted every two years.
Therefore, the sampling methodologies and the survey design are expected to improve in
future rounds, and the quality of the data will be further enhanced over time.

 3.2 Survey Design (Preparation and Implementation of the Survey)
NPIU, FICCI and World Bank held a series of interviews with employers. Suggestions
provided by employers were incorporated into the questionnaire. As a result, the overall
survey design and instrument were improved over the course of pilot surveys.

During the pilot surveys, the employers were asked four specific questions to improve the
survey questionnaires and implementation. The four questions were:

First, ―Who will evaluate employer’s satisfaction”? (Human resource department,
supervisors of newly hired, or a third person). Presumably, employers are in the best
position to identify appropriate evaluator of the fresh engineering hires. Therefore, the
survey invitation was sent to the human resource department which decided the
responsibility to complete the survey.



                                                                                               7
Second, ―Who will be evaluated”? (A fresh class of graduates or those who have already a
few years‘ experiences). Given the fact that many fresh engineers change jobs within a
year or so, external effects such as in-house training should be removed as much as
possible in order to assess learning outcomes at institutions. It was therefore decided that
the target population would be the fresh graduates from technical and engineering
institutions for whom this was their first job. Hence, employers were asked not to consider
engineers for whom this was not their first job after graduation.

Third, ―At what level should the employers evaluate? (At individual level, at institutional
level such as Indian Institutes of Technology, National Institutes of Technology,
institutions that participated in the Technical Education Quality Improvement Program, etc,
or by overall average of all fresh hires)‖. It was decided to send one single questionnaire
to each company due to the administrative burden to deal with multiple questionnaires per
different graduate group. Employers then evaluated all first-time-employed engineers
hired over the previous four years together as one group.

Fourth, ―How will the questionnaires be distributed to companies? (Online survey, email
invitation, or paper-based questionnaire via physical mail)‖. The on-line survey was
finally selected as the survey method because it is easy to manage and organize the data
collected from employers. Further, on-line survey can be easily used again in the next
round of the employer satisfaction survey in two years. FICCI randomly selected
employers who were provided with a username and password. After logging into the
survey, employers were asked to complete the survey and provide company characteristics.

    3.3 Survey Instrument
The questionnaire design builds upon three sources: the expected learning outcomes used
for accreditation by the National Board of Accreditation (NBA), previous employer
surveys, and consultations with employers. The questionnaire is divided into three
sections; (i) Overall satisfaction level, (ii) Importance and Satisfaction of 26 different
skills, and (iii) Employer‘s characteristics. 4 Employers were asked to evaluate both the
importance and satisfaction levels of each of the 26 skills on a five point scale.

The NBA, India‘s only official accreditation body for engineering education, has
established 11 Program Outcomes. NBA is a provisional member of the Washington
Accord—an international agreement between accreditation agencies for engineering
education for 18 countries. Therefore, NBA‘s program outcomes (expected learning
outcomes for graduates) are based upon the internationally agreed set of the skills and
knowledge that graduates are expected to possess at the time of graduation.5 The NBA
criteria are:
4
  The survey questionnaire is attached in Annex 3. The questionnaire asks about importance and satisfaction
for 26 skills divided into two overall groups: General and Specific skills. The General skill referred mainly to
personal characteristics while Specific skills mainly referred to those skills directly related to technical and
engineering professions as well as communication and computer skills. The categorization of skills into
General and Specific Skills was conducted in an a-priori manner following consultations with government
officials, employers, and academia. Section 5 will go in detail more systematic and empirically-based
categorization. The survey questionnaire is attached in Annex 3.
5
  The NBA learning outcomes and the ABET learning outcomes are very similar, but do have a few
important differences. For example, the NBA criterion (e) asks for the graduates to ―demonstrate an ability to
                                                                                                              8
(a) Graduates will demonstrate knowledge of mathematics, science and engineering.
(b) Graduates will demonstrate an ability to identify, formulate and solve engineering
    problems.
(c) Graduates will demonstrate an ability to design and conduct experiments, analyze and
    interpret data.
(d) Graduates will demonstrate an ability to design a system, component or process as per
    needs and specifications.
(e) Graduates will demonstrate an ability to visualize and work on laboratory and
    multidisciplinary tasks.
(f) Graduate will demonstrate skills to use modern engineering tools, techware and
    equipment to analyze problems.
(g) Graduates will demonstrate knowledge of professional and ethical responsibilities.
(h) Graduate will be able to communicate effectively in both verbal and written form.
(i) Graduate will show the understanding of impact of engineering solutions on the
    society and also will be aware of contemporary issues.
(j) Graduate will develop confidence for self-education and ability for life-long learning.
(k) Graduate who can participate and succeed in competitive examinations.

Ten out of the 11 NBA Program Outcomes were included in the questions (some in an
abbreviated form). Thirteen skills from previous employer surveys, notably from (Kleinke,
2006) were added. These were in particular skills often referred to as soft skills or core
skills or employability skills, such as integrity, self-motivation, team skills etc. Further
three specific skills were added, namely ―Basic computer‖, ―Advanced Computer‖, and
―Customer Service Skills‖. Lastly, another three skills ―Technical Skills (programming)‖
―Communication in English‖ and ―Entrepreneurship Skills‖, were included as per request
of employers.

Definition of skills and a common understanding of what a skill is, poses a problem for
comparability and interpretation. Given the survey has to be relatively short to ensure an
acceptable response rate, the questionnaire did not define each skill. In most instances, an
additional explanation of example is provided in parenthesis. However, it is possibly that
employers may have perceived the meaning of the skills differently. In addition, some of
the skills are overlapping in the sense if a person possess skill a, then they are strongly
expected also to possess an element of skill b. One such example is ―Self-motivated‖ and
―Self-discipline‖. However, there is no widely accepted categorization of skills that are
exhaustive and non-overlapping. Hence, an overlap is unavoidable in our view.




work on multidisciplinary tasks‖, while the ABET criteria (d) asks for the graduates to ―function on multi-
disciplinary teams‖. Although, the difference is subtle, the ABET criterion directly asks for team-skills,
while the NBA does not.
                                                                                                         9
Obviously, each employer has different perceptions and expectations toward engineering
graduate skills. The respondents‘ perceptions and expectations may arbitrarily influence
the ratings of the satisfaction and importance levels because of, for instance, wording and
orderings of questions. Therefore, many economists are skeptical about the
meaningfulness of the answers from so-called ―subjective questions‖. We acknowledge
this subjective element of this analysis. However a growing literature within different
strands of economics, such as happiness and competitiveness use subjective survey data
for econometric and/or psychometric analysis. In addition, management and marketing
professionals employ a battery of satisfaction surveys, e.g., employee satisfaction surveys,
customer satisfaction surveys, etc. to inform key decisions. We therefore follow the advice
of Bertrand and Mullainathan (2001) who argues that subjective measures may be helpful
as explanatory variables with due diligence to the interpretation of the results.

4. Characteristics of Respondents

This section shows descriptive statistics of the respondents (employers). The surveyed
employers are those that hire engineering graduates. The summary of descriptive statistics
of 157 employers is presented in Table A2-1 in Annex 2.

Size: Half of respondents are large companies with more than 500 employees, while the
other half is equally divided into medium (with between 100 and 500 employees) and
small employers (with less than 100 employees). Given that a half of the employers in our
sample are large companies with more than 500 employees, we may have oversampled
large companies. As a result, the outcomes of the survey may reflect more views of the
larger companies.

Location: More than 40% of the responding employers are from the North region where
Delhi is located, and 27% and 19% are from West and South regions, respectively. State-
wise, Delhi dominates the sample (27%), and Maharashtra where Mumbai is located
accounts for 19%. Other major states have a share of 38% in total; Uttar Pradesh 8.9%
(the most populous state), Gujarat 8.9% (one of the fastest economically growing states),
Haryana 8.3% (a large area of the state is included in the National Capital Region),
Karnataka 7.0% (one of the economically progressive states), and Andhra Pradesh 5.1%
(one of the top IT exporting states).

Sector: The survey covers almost 20 sectors of industries. As discussed in the
Introduction, IT, Infrastructure, and Power sectors show increasing demand of qualified
engineering graduates. These sectors have the highest share of employers in the sample
after ―Other‖. One third of the companies answered that their sectors do not belong to any
of the listed sectors in the questionnaire and selected ―Other‖. This ―Other‖ is further
disaggregated into mining, other service activities, and professional, scientific and
technical activities by using the responses from another question ―Please specify the major
economic activity of your firm‖.

Foreign Capital: Twenty percent of the responding firms were established with foreign
capital.



                                                                                         10
Respondents: Half of the respondents are a head/manager of a human resource department.
About 18% are a manager of engineering graduates‘ department. Approximately 15% are
a business owner or partner. The large share of head/manager of human resource
department could have been a potential problem if the survey evaluated individual skill
sets. However, the survey rated a group of new hires across the company. Therefore, the
human resources department would be best placed to assess skills of newly hired engineers
as a group.

Consequently, the sample covered a wide range of employers across sectors, regions, size
of companies, etc. This suggests that the results are relatively representative. However,
the sample may not fully represent the true population, i.e., the total number of the
employers that hire engineering graduates in India. Since we do not have detailed
enterprise level data on who hires engineers, we cannot compare our sample with the true
population.

5. Findings

This section presents the major findings. First the section presents the results of a factor
analysis of the 25 skills rated by the employers. 6 Based on the skill groups, detail analysis
is further conducted to respond to the three research questions raised in the introduction:
(i) How satisfied are employers with the skills of engineering graduates? (ii) Which skills
do employers consider important when hiring new engineering graduates? and (iii) In
which important skills are the engineers falling short?

    5.1 Grouping Skills
We conduct a factor analysis of the 25 individual skills to group the individual skills into a
small number of skill groups (factors).

We group the skills because it is plausible that a common latent factor (skill/ability)
partially drives the importance and satisfaction ratings of a group of individual abilities.
For instance, employers and HR-staff often talk about the importance of ―soft skills‖.
There is hence a notion that a set of interpersonal skills are related into one group and that
this group of skills is important. However, ―soft skills‖ are often neither well defined nor
backed-up by empirical evidence that the individual skills referred to as soft skills form
one group. Factor analysis is one of the ways to test this notion of soft skills and
empirically define the individual skills that make up ―soft skills‖. Further, the
identification of a small number of factors allow us to identify commonalities in demand
and supply for skills, and structures the findings and provides a limit set of overall findings.

Factor analysis fits exactly the above goal of reducing the number of variables into overall
groups. It is a statistical procedure to find the latent variables that explain attributes of
common variables in the observed variables. Factor analysis is widely used in social
science, especially in psychological researches and business surveys. Psychologists, for
instance, conduct empirical researches on the relationship between personality traits and
job performance. They examine numerous personal traits and categorize them into five
6
 A skill, ―Accepts responsibility for consequences of actions‖ is dropped from the analysis since the skill is
quite similar to ―Reliability‖
                                                                                                           11
representative personal traits by using factor analysis. Those five personal traits are called
―Big Five‖ that represents an overall pattern of all personality traits and recent papers have
examined the link between these traits and income, (Borghans, Lex, Duckworth and
Heckman 2008).

By using factor analysis, 26 skills listed in the questionnaire were grouped into three
factors using the importance ratings. Table 3 below presents the resulting groups (factors)
of skills generated by factor analysis. Skills emboldened in Table 3 are those with more
than 0.55 of factor loadings.7

                           Table 3: Skills grouped into Three Factors
            Factor 1                              Factor 2                               Factor 3
    (Core Employability Skills)              (Professional Skills)                  (Communication Skills)
     Integrity                      Identify, formulate, and solve           Written communication
     Self-discipline                 technical/engineering problems           Design & conduct experiments,
     Reliability                    Design a system, component, or            and analyze and interpret data
     Self-motivated                  process to meet desired needs            Reading
     Entrepreneurship Skills        Use appropriate/modern tools,            Communication in English
     Teamwork                        equipment, technologies                  Technical Skills
     Understands and takes          Apply knowledge of mathematics,          Verbal communication
      directions for work             science, engineering                     Basic computer
      assignments                    Customer Service Skills                  Advanced computer
     Willingness to learn           Knowledge of contemporary issues
     Flexibility                    Creativity
     Empathy

Table A2-2 in Annex 2 lists all skills with factor loadings that explain dimensions of each
factor in more details. The three factors above account for more than 85% of the total
variance.

The first factor predominantly consists of personal characteristics. The skills with high
factor loading are ―Integrity‖, ―Self-discipline‖, ―Reliability‖, ―Self-motivated‖,
―Entrepreneurship Skills‖, ―Teamwork‖, ―Understands and takes directions for work
assignments‖, and ―Willingness to learn‖. This factor is named Core Employability Skills,
since these skills are not occupation specific, but cuts across occupations. Other studies
refer to this set of skills as generic, catalytic, core and/or employability.

The second factor is essentially comprised of engineering specific skills, of which the
following are the skills with high loading; ―Identify, formulate, and solve
technical/engineering problems‖, ―Design a system, component, or process to meet
desired needs‖, ―Use appropriate/modern tools, equipment, technologies‖, and ―Apply
knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering‖. Following the HR-literature and other
employer surveys, we call this factor for ―Professional Skills‖. In the engineering
education literature, this set of skills is also referred to as technical skills.

7
  Factor loadings are the correlation coefficients between each variable and the factor. Items with higher load
are more relevant to the respective factor. Based on the guidelines made by Comrey and Lee (1992), items
(skills) that load more than 0.55 are considered ―very good‖. TableA2-2 in Annex 2 shows the skills with
the factor loadings.
                                                                                                           12
The third factor mixes different types of skills, e.g., communication skills, cognitive skills,
and computer skills. The high loading skills in the third factor include ―Written
communication‖, ―Design & conduct experiments, and analyze and interpret data‖,
―Reading‖, and ―Communication in English‖. This factor includes skills which may not be
directly relevant to communication, such as ―Design & conduct experiments, and analyze
and interpret data‖. However, Table 3 and Table A2-2 show that all communication skills
fall in the third factor with relatively higher loadings. Therefore, the third factor is named
Communication Skill.

The three names of the factors do not necessarily represent all skills in respective factors,
but these three names do represent the majority of skills with high loadings. It should also
be noted that naming factors is a mere poetic, theoretical, and inductive leap (Pett, Lackey,
Sullivan, 2003). Therefore, it is important to look into the composition of these three
factors and understand actual skills explaining each factor.

The three factors obtained from factor analysis are similar to other studies using factor
analysis. For instance, as presented in Table 1 from Section 2, Paranto and Kelker (1999)
grouped skills into four factors, Specific, Core, Personal Characteristics, and
Communication Skills. The factor, Core Employability Skills, corresponds to Core and
Personal skills, and Professional Skills to Specific skills, and Communication Skills to
Communication Skills. This similarity with empirical findings from other employer
surveys increases our confidence of the above categorization of skills.

The three skills group identified by the above factor analysis partly corroborates one of the
most used learning classifications, the Bloom‘s taxonomy, (Bloom 1956). Bloom‘s
taxonomy suggests the existence of three domains of learning. The term ―learning‖ is
synonymous to the term ―skill‖ as used in this paper. The three domains are:

      Cognitive skills involve knowledge and the development of intellectual skills,

      Affective skills include the manner in which we deal with things emotionally, such
       as feeling, values, appreciation, enthusiasm, motivations, and attitudes, and

      Psychomotor skills encompass physical movements, coordination, and the use of
       motor-skill areas.

The types of skills that our factor analysis categorizes under the Core Employability Skills
mostly belong to the Affective domain in Bloom‘s taxonomy (Integrity, self-discipline,
reliability, and team-work). The types of skills categorized under the Professional Skills all
belong to the Cognitive domain in Bloom‘s taxonomy (remembering knowledge,
understanding, applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating). The skills categorized under
the third factor Communication Skills are a more mixed bag, as discussed above, and do
not correspond to a specific domain in the Bloom‘s taxonomy. In Bloom‘s taxonomy
communication skills are mostly classified as part of the Affective Domain. This partial
match of our identified skills categories with the Bloom‘s taxonomy provides further
confidence in the use of the three skills group in the rest of the paper.



                                                                                            13
 Using these three categories of skills (Core Employability, Professional Skills, and
 Communication Skills), the remaining of this section responds to the three research
 questions on importance, satisfaction, and skill gaps.

  5.2 Importance: Which Skills Do Employers Demand in Engineering Graduates?
 The level of importance attached to each skill reveals employers‘ valuation of, and
 demand for, that skill. Table 4 below summarizes the importance level of each skill under
 the three factors as perceived by the employers. Standard deviations are presented in Table
 A2-3 in Annex 2 which also contains statistical tests for statistically significant differences
 in importance scores as discussed below. All skills are on average rated from 3.5 (half way
 between ―Somewhat important‖ and ―very important‖) to 4.5 (half way between ―very
 important‖ and ―extremely important‖). Hence, all skills in the questionnaire are rated as
 important.

 Core Employability Skills show the highest level of importance on average. The high
 importance level of reliability and teamwork is consistent with the qualitative feedback
 from employers received during the pilot surveys. Many employers specifically look for
 engineers who are reliable and can effectively work with team members.

                       Table 4: Importance Level by Three Factor Skills
Core Employability      Mean        Professional Skills      Mean     Communication Skills        Mean
      Integrity          4.48       Use of modern tools       4.08   Communication in English      4.26
     Reliability         4.42    Apply Math/Sci/Engg know.    4.07    Written Communication        4.07
    Teamwork             4.41            Creativity           4.07            Reading              4.04
Willingness to learn     4.40         Problem solving         3.93       Technical Skills          4.02
 Entrepreneurship        4.35      System design to needs     3.84   Experiments/data analysis     4.01
  Self-discipline        4.26       Contemporary issues       3.83    Verbal Communication         4.00
  Self-motivated         4.22        Customer Service         3.51        Basic computer           3.95
     Flexibility         4.15                                          Advanced computer           3.71
 Understand/take
     directions           4.14
      Empathy             3.92
      Average             4.27           Average              3.91           Average                  4.01


 Employers rated Professional Skills the lowest on average among the three factor skills.
 This may be partly because employers think that engineering related skills can be partly
 remedied through in-house training even after graduation while Core Employability Skills
 would require longer timeframe to be acquired.

 Communication in English is ranked the most important skill under Communication Skills.
 This could be explained by English being the preferred language in many economic
 sectors and firms. Azam, Chin, and Prakash (2010) also find that employers demand
 English skills. Specifically, they estimate based upon a large household survey that
 English communication skills increase the hourly wages of men by a whopping 34%. The
 return mainly accrues to young highly educated workers (such as engineers). As Indian
 economic activities go global, better command of English language is desired. In addition,
 the high ranking of Communication in English could be partially attributed to the fact that

                                                                                                 14
  there has been an increasing demand for Indian engineers in the software and information
  technology-enabled service (ITES) sectors that are provide services in English to
  customers in the United States and the United Kingdom (Ferrari and Dhingra, 2009). A
  one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted to test whether the mean
  importance scores of Communication in English are equal between firm sizes, firms
  with/without foreign capital, and firms in difference economic sectors. Large firms
  consider Communication in English more important than medium and small firms. Firms
  with foreign capital have higher importance mean scores than those without foreign capital.
  The IT sector has relatively higher scores than other sectors. However, these results are not
  statistically significant. The results of analysis are presented in Table A2:4 - 6 of Annex
  2.8

  A similar employer survey undertaken in the US in 2004 equally asked for the importance
  level of skills of engineering bachelor graduates (Lattuca, Terenzini, Volkwein, 2006
  study for ABET). The formulation of the skills is very similar if not identical for 10
  Professional Skills.9 The two surveys allow us to examine whether US employers demands
  the same skills as the Indian employers. In particular, we focus on whether the employers
  share the same prioritization of skills; i.e. is the ranking of the importance similar among
  the employers of the two countries? Table 5 ranks the importance of skills in each country
  based upon the percentage of employers responding ―Very or Extremely Important‖ (the
  two highest responses on a five point scale). The picture is mixed. In general, employers in
  both countries rank team-work, applying math/science/engineering knowledge and
  communication skills high, while raking skills related to knowledge of contemporary
  issues, system design, and design of experiments low. However, some skills are ranked
  differently, such as lifelong learning (valued by Indian employers and less so by US
  employers). We cannot test whether the rankings are statistically significantly the same
  since we do not have the underlying data for the US employer survey.

            Table 5 Ranking of Importance of Skills in India compared to the US
                        India                                                         US
     % of                                                                                               % of
  employers                                                                                          employers
respond ―Very                      Skill                                   Skill                   respond ―Very
 or Extremely                                                                                       or Extremely
  Important‖                                                                                         Important‖
     94%          Lifelong-learning                        Communicate effectively                      91%
                  Understand professional and
                                                                                                        86%
      93%         ethical responsibilities                 Engineering problem solving

  8
    Nevertheless, there is also the possibility that the formulation of the questionnaire in English implied that
  an English speaking person filled out the questionnaire. This could potentially have introduced a bias
  towards increased importance of English.
  9
    There is a logical explanation why the two surveys asked feedback on a set of skills that were almost
  identically formulated. The US survey sought feedback on the ABET EC2000 (a)-(k) criteria. These criteria
  formed the basis for the formulation of the expected attributes and competences of an engineer graduate in
  the Washington Accord. The NBA criteria used in this Indian employer survey were formulated to be
  consistent with the Washington Accord.
                                                                                                             15
     93%        Teamwork                                Teamwork                                     79%
                Apply math, science, and                Apply math, science, and
                                                                                                     78%
     85%        engineering know.                       engineering know.
     84%        Communicate effectively                 Use modern engineering tools                 77%
                                                        Understand professional and
                                                                                                     73%
     83%        Use modern engineering tools            ethical responsibilities
     83%        Design and conduct experiments          Design a system to meet needs                66%
     80%        Engineering problem solving             Lifelong-learning                            60%
     75%        Design a system to meet needs           Design and conduct experiments               59%
                Knowledge of Contemporary               Knowledge of Contemporary
                                                                                                     25%
     71%        issues                                  issues
Source: Authors for India and Lattuca, Terenzini, Volkwein study for ABET 2006 for the US.
Note: Year of survey for the US was 2004 and 2009 for India. The both surveys asked employers to rate the
importance on a five-point scale. The wording of the US scale differed marginally from the Indian survey.
Whereas the top two most importance categories in the Indian scale was "Very or Extremely", the two
highest importance levels were termed "Highly Important or Essential".


A similarity in the demand for skills would suggest that employers in India and the US
share the same perception of skill set that an engineering graduate should learn. 10 This
would support the value of having common standards in engineering education as sought
by the accrediting bodies that are members of the Washington Accord. A similarity in
demand would also suggest that the factors driving skill demand in the two countries:
technologies, competitiveness, and composition of economic sectors are relatively similar
in the two countries.

Soft Skills vs. Professional Skills (Importance): Many employers emphasized the
importance of soft skills during interviews. Also other studies have discussed that many
employers spend significant amount of resources to provide employees with training for
improvement in not only technical but also soft skills, for example (Wadhwa, Kim de
Vitton, Gereffi, 2008). Therefore, we test the importance of Soft Skills relative to
Professional Skills. When discussing soft skills, communication skills are often part of
soft skills. Therefore, a variable Soft Skills is created by combining Core Employability
Skills with Communication Skills variables. Then, the following assumption is statistically
tested: ―Employers perceive Soft Skills as more important than Professional Skills‖. In
order to verify the assumption above, a t-test is conducted with a null hypothesis that the
mean of Soft Skills is the same as that of Professional Skills in terms of the importance
level. In other words, do employers perceive that Soft Skills and Professional Skills are
equally important? The result of the t-test in Table A2-8 in Annex 2 suggests that we
reject the null hypothesis and shows that the mean of Soft Skills is significantly higher than
that of Professional Skills in importance level. The mean of Soft Skills is 4.15 (0.03) while
that of Professional Skills is 3.98 (0.05).11 The probability of the null hypothesis is less

10
   Although the two survey questionnaires are almost identical, the interfered comparison of skills demanded
in the two countries may not be comparable. This is the case if the response on importance is influenced by
the skill set of available engineers in each country. For instance, if a large share of Indian employers rate
lifelong learning skills ―very important‖ because that skill is in short supply; while a lower share of US
employers rate lifelong learning skills ―very important‖, because graduating engineers in the US possess this
skills.
11
   The figures in the parentheses are standard deviations.
                                                                                                          16
than 0.001. Therefore, our data provides support for the assumption above, ―Employers
perceive soft skills as more important than Professional Skills‖.

Further, a similar analysis is conducted to test whether Core Employability Skills are
statistically different from Professional Skills, and similarly Communication Skills from
Professional Skills. The results are the same as above. The means of Core Employability
Skills and Communication Skills are 4.27 (0.04) and 4.01 (0.04), respectively. Both of
them are significantly higher than the mean of Professional Skills with the p-value of less
than 0.001 and 0.014 in Core Employability Skills and Communication Skills, respectively.
Hence, employers perceive both Core Employability Skills and Communication Skills more
important than Professional Skills. Table A2-9 and A2-10 in Annex 2 present the detailed
test information.

The results of the analysis are consistent with the qualitative findings, which report that
employers in India are trying to broaden the talent pool and develop a recruitment
philosophy to hire for general ability and attitude rather than specialized domain and
professional skills (Wadhwa, Kim de Vitton, Gereffi, 2008). The National Knowledge
Commission report (2008) also emphasizes the importance of soft skills as one of the
survival skills for individuals. One of the reasons that employers perceive Soft Skills more
important than Professional Skills might be that stronger Soft Skills, such as willingness to
learn, lead to continuous improvement of Professional Skills.

There is a discussion to which extent institutions and teachers should aim for improved
Core Employability (Integrity, Reliability, Teamwork, Willingness to learn etc.) and
Communication Skills and to which extent that they can be held accountable for the
graduates‘ skills in these skill categories, given these are to a degree acquired prior to
higher education. Nevertheless, it is critical that engineering institutions recognize the
importance of Soft Skills. Based upon the importance of these skill sets, it is our view that
education institutions should actively foster the learning of Soft Skills. This would add to
the professional skills of graduate and increase their employability and trainability.

Does demand for skills vary between Economic Sectors, Firm sizes, and regions?
The analysis so far is conducted at national level. This section analyzes the data
disaggregated by sector, firm size and regional levels. In order to assess whether or not
employer‘s characteristics have an impact on their perceptions of the level of importance
in Soft and Professional Skills, the Kendall‘s rank correlation coefficient is used to
determine whether the orderings of importance level in skills differ across sectors, size,
and regions.

The Kendall‘s rank correlation analysis is helpful when comparing the orderings of two or
more groups. It is a non-parametric measure assessing the degree of correspondence
between sets of rakings. A pair of variables needs to transform one rank order into the
other. Depending on the degree of correspondence between the set of rankings, the
Kendall‘s rank correlation coefficient lies between -1 and 1. If the value is 1, the
agreement between two rankings is perfect (same orderings). If the value is -1, the ranking
order is completely reversed. If the value is 0, the ordering of the two variables are
independent. For our dataset, if the orderings of the importance level differ across sectors,

                                                                                          17
sizes, and regions, then skill demand depends upon the employer‘s characteristics (sector,
size, and region).

First, we test whether the orderings of importance level in soft and Professional Skills
differ across sectors. Because there are some sectors that do not have sufficient sample
size, the test takes into account only the following sectors, which have relatively larger
samples; Automobiles, IT, Infrastructure, Mining, Oil & Gas, Other Service Sectors, and
Power. The null hypothesis of the test is that the orderings of the importance level in skills
in sector X and Y are different (independent). In soft skills, 18 out of 28 sector pairs with
asterisks indicate that orderings in the level of importance are not statistically different
from zero (Table A2-14 in Annex 2). In Professional Skills, only 4 sector pairs show that
they are not different (Table A2-15 in Annex 2). In other words, most sectors have a
common perception about which soft skills are important, while they value different kinds
of Professional Skills.

For instance, infrastructure sector, which is one of the sectors facing serious skill gaps,
shows that the ordering of the importance level in Soft Skills does not differ from the other
sectors, except from that of the Power sector. As for Professional Skills of Infrastructure,
the ordering of the importance level statistically significantly differs from the ordering of
other sectors (with exception of the Power and Oil&Gas sectors). For example while
infrastructure emphasizes the importance of knowledge of math/science/engineering and
ability to use modern tools, IT prioritizes creativity the highest. This result indicates that
the Infrastructure sector tends to demand similar Soft Skills as other sectors. In contrast,
the priority in Professional Skills tends to be more unique to the sector.

Secondly, a similar test is conducted for firm size. The null hypothesis of the test is that
the orderings of the importance level in skills are different by size of company. Table A2-
16 in Annex 2 shows that the orderings of the importance level of Soft Skills do not differ
across small, medium, and large firms. Therefore, like the analysis conducted across
sectors, employers tend to consider the same Soft Skills important, irrespective of firm size.

However, the similar analysis for Professional Skills shows a different picture (Table A2-
17 in Annex 2). Firm size matters when it comes to demand for Professional Skills. Large
companies with more than 500 employees ask for different Professional Skills compared
to both medium and small firms. For instance, while large companies demand creativity
the most, small companies look for ability to use modern tools, knowledge of
math/science/engineering, and problem solving skills. Small and medium companies seem
to demand the same set of skills, since there is no statistically significant difference in the
ordering of importance level of Professional Skills.

Finally, another similar test was conducted by region. The results are similar to the
analyses above. The important Soft Skills are common to most regions while many regions
tend to consider different priorities in Professional Skills. Table A2-18 in Annex 2 shows
that only one pair, Central and West, indicates that the order of importance level in Soft
Skills are not the same. All the other pairs show that the regions tend to consider similar
Soft Skills important. As for Professional Skills, the order of importance differs across
regions (Table A2-19). For instance, problem solving skill in North is considered

                                                                                            18
relatively more important than other Professional Skills (ranked 3rd among 7 Professional
Skills), but that in South problem-solving is only ranked 6th.

To summarize, we find that similar Soft Skills are considered important across sectors,
regions, and firm sizes. The analysis also shows that employers tend to have different
priorities in Professional Skills depending upon their characteristics.

 5.3 Satisfaction: To What Extent Does the Skill Set of Engineering Graduates Meet
     Demand?
Overall, 64% of employers are only somewhat satisfied or worse with the quality of
engineering graduates‘ skills. 3.9% of employers rate the skills as ―Not at all satisfied‖,
16.1% as ―Not very satisfied‖, and 43.9% as ―Somewhat satisfied‖. The average rating on
―overall are you satisfied with the newly graduated engineer that you have hired over the
last 4 years?‖ is only 3.15. That is slight above ―somewhat satisfied‖. The mean of the
average satisfaction rating of each of the 26 skills is similar: 3.19, which indicates that the
employers have responded fairly consistently on the dis-satisfaction level for both the
overall level compared to each of the specific skills. It is noteworthy that none of the skills
listed in the questionnaire are on average rated above 4.0, ―Very Satisfied‖, which means
that no skill satisfies employers at the ―very‖ or ―extremely‖ level. Given that this is the
first survey one cannot compare with either previous surveys to evaluate whether
satisfaction has decreased over the last decade as a consequence of the massive expansion
(800% from 1998 to 2008). This (dis-)satisfaction level is corroborated by other studies on
skills of the Indian engineering graduates. For instance, the NASSCOM and McKinsey
report (2005) finds that 75% of engineering graduates are not employable by multinational
companies.

Obviously, this (dis-)satisfaction level is an average. There is no doubt that India produces
a large number of exceptionally bright engineers, as can be seen in the importance of high-
tech entrepreneurs in the US that are of Indian origin, (Wadhwa, Rissing, Saxenian, and
Gereffi, 2007) and the share of international publications that come from Indian
engineering education Institutions. Also, it could be that employers have unrealistically
high expectations regarding the potential skill level of graduates. In the US survey of
engineering graduates, the average satisfaction rate was 4.01 equivalent to ―very satisfied‖.
While the Indo-US difference is likely to reflect a difference in the quality of the graduates‘
skills, it could also stem from more reasonable expectations from employers or a generally
more positive attitude of US employers. One should be cautious in directly comparing
subjective surveys internationally.12



12
   Satisfaction level of employers toward graduates‘ skills is not always pessimistic, at least in other
countries. Several similar employer surveys in the US, for instance, show that employers are satisfied, in
some cases very satisfied, with graduates‘ skills. The employer survey conducted by Noel-Levitz and Utah
State University shows that employers are very satisfied with the graduates from Utah State University. They
show the interest to continue to hire the graduates. Another employer survey conducted by the University of
Texas-Pan American also shows that very few employers are dissatisfied with graduates‘ skills. Given the
different contexts between the US and India, satisfaction level cannot be simply comparable between the two
countries. However, employers do not always unrealistically evaluate their satisfaction level toward
graduates‘ skills.
                                                                                                         19
  The dissatisfaction level of employers toward engineering graduates‘ skills confirms that a
  significant share of graduating engineers does not meet employers‘ expected standards.
  Even if employers demanded unrealistically high skills from graduates, there is a
  substantial quality gap between institutions (the producers) and employers (the consumers).
  This quality gap needs to be addressed.

  Table 6 below presents the satisfaction level of each skill under the three factors. The
  level of Core Employability Skills is relatively more satisfying than the other two skill
  factors. It can be also seen that employers are most satisfied with Communication in
  English. Further, knowledge of math/science/ engineering and basic computer are at the
  highest level of satisfaction in Professional Skills. This intuitively makes sense as these
  skills were some of the main vehicles for the initial success of the India‘s offshore IT
  business.

  In contract, satisfaction of higher-order thinking skills such as problem solving, system
  design, and experiments/data analysis is at an alarming level—only ―somewhat satisfied”
  on average. This result reflects the views from many, if not most, firms. During a series
  of interviews, employers pointed out that most engineering graduates lack these higher
  order thinking skills, especially problem solving. More detail information of satisfaction
  level is presented in Table A2-7 in Annex 2.

                         Table 6: Satisfaction Level by Three Factors

Core Employability     Mean    Professional Skills    Mean      Communication Skills       Mean
      Integrity        3.50 Apply Math/Sci/Engg know. 3.23     Communication in English    3.95
    Teamwork           3.46    Use of modern tools    3.15          Basic computer         3.34
 Entrepreneurship      3.44         Creativity        3.08      Written Communication      3.22
  Self-discipline      3.37   System design to needs  2.95      Verbal Communication       3.17
Willingness to learn   3.37    Contemporary issues    2.95         Technical Skills        3.13
     Flexibility       3.29      Problem solving      2.87              Reading            3.08
     Reliability       3.20     Customer Service      2.65       Advanced computer         3.03
      Empathy          3.15                                    Experiments/data analysis   3.02
  Self-motivated       3.12
  Understand/take
      directions       3.12
      Average          3.30          Average            2.98           Average             3.24

  We compare the satisfaction levels with findings from a US employer survey of
  engineering graduates. The results of the two surveys should be interpreted with caution,
  for two main reasons: (i) The survey questionnaires differed slightly. The US employers
  were asked to rate five combined types of skills on a three point scale, while the Indian
  employers were rating using a five point scale on a series of individual skills (these
  differences were not present for the importance questions analyzed above); (ii) satisfaction
  rates depend critically upon the respondent‘s expectations. For example, it may be that the
  competences of the Indian and the US graduates are identical, but the Indian employers
  have high expectations than the US employers, and the former is therefore less satisfied.
  The results tentatively suggest that Indian employers are less satisfied with their graduates
  compared to the US employers‘ assessment of their graduates. The Indian employers are

                                                                                             20
less satisfied than their US peers on three out of the four types of skills; notably on ―Use of
Math, Science, and Engineering knowledge‖, ―Applying Problem Solving skills‖, and
―Learn, Grow and Adapt‖.

Figure 1 Dissatisfaction Levels between Indian and US Employers
                    and Technica
      and Problem- Grow, Sci, and


                                    India                                       21%
                   Adapt l Skills
    ication Apply Learn, Math,
                           Use




                                     U.S.                8%
                                    India                              16%
                                     U.S.                          14%
   Teamwo Solving




                                    India                                                          33%
            Skills




                                     U.S.                                      20%
   Commun




                                    India                                17%
       rk




                                     U.S.                                              25%

                                            0%   5%      10%     15%     20%         25%     30%   35%
                                                      % of employers being dis-satisfied

Source: Authors for India and Lattuca, Terenzini, Volkwein study for ABET 2006 for the US.
Note: Year of survey for the US was 2004 and 2009 for India.

Soft Skills vs. Professional Skills (Satisfaction): As in the case of importance level,
satisfaction level of both Soft and Professional Skills is analyzed to see how well (or
unwell) engineering graduates meet employers‘ expectation for Soft and Professional
Skills.

A t-test is conducted with a following null hypothesis: ―the mean of Soft Skills is the same
as that of Professional Skills in terms of the satisfaction level‖. The mean satisfaction
score of Soft Skills is 3.27 (0.05), and that of Professional Skills is 2.98 (0.06). The mean
satisfaction score of Soft Skills is statistically significantly higher than that of Professional
Skills. Hence, the result suggests that the null hypothesis be rejected (See Table A2-11),
and indicates that employers are more satisfied with Soft Skills than Professional Skills.

We also independently tested for the two soft skill factors (Core Employability Skills and
Communication Skills) compared to Professional Skills. The null hypotheses are; (i) the
mean of Core Employability Skills is the same as that of Professional Skills, and (ii) the
mean of Communication Skills is the same as that of Professional Skills. The mean scores
of Core Employability Skills and Communication Skills are 3.30 (0.05) and 3.24(0.05),
respectively, compared to 2.98(0.06) for Professional Skills. Both mean scores are
significantly higher than Professional Skills’ scores of 2.98, and the result of the two t-
tests suggests that we reject both hypotheses (See Table A2-12 and A2-13). Hence, the
results of analysis show that employers are more satisfied with both Core Employability
Skills and Communication Skills than Professional Skills.


                                                                                                         21
  As the satisfaction level of Soft Skills is considered higher than that of Professional Skills
  among employers, engineering graduates seem to respond relatively better to the demand
  of Soft Skills, compared to that of Professional Skills. However, as shown earlier, the
  overall satisfaction level for Soft Skills remains quite low; only slightly above ―somewhat
  satisfied‖.

   5.4 Skill Gaps
  This section responds to the third question, ―In which important skills are the engineers
  falling short?‖ This section combines the analysis of the importance ratings and the
  satisfaction ratings to identify the specific skills that are in high demand (high importance),
  but satisfaction rates are low. These are the skills gaps that are most urgent to address.

  We calculate the skill gap as the difference between the importance level and the
  satisfaction level. A high skill gap signals that the skill is important and that the graduates
  do not meet expectations. Table 7 presents the skill gaps by skill factor, while Figure 2
  displays the skill gap sorted by mean scores of importance level in descending order.

                              Table 7: Skills Gaps by Three Factor Skills

 Core Employability          Mean        Professional Skills     Mean     Communication Skills        Mean
      Reliability             1.22        Problem solving         1.06   Experiments/data analysis     0.99
   Self-motivated             1.10           Creativity           0.99            Reading              0.96
 Willingness to learn         1.03      Use of modern tools       0.93       Technical Skills          0.89
Understand/take directions    1.03     System design to needs     0.89    Written Communication        0.85
       Integrity              0.98      Contemporary issues       0.88    Verbal Communication         0.83
      Teamwork                0.95   Apply Math/Sci/Engg know.    0.85     Advanced computer           0.68
   Entrepreneurship           0.91       Customer Service         0.85        Basic computer           0.61
    Self-discipline           0.90                                       Communication in English      0.31
      Flexibility             0.86
       Empathy                0.77
       Average                0.98           Average              0.92           Average               0.77




                                                                                                 22
                                   Figure 2: Skill Gaps




There are skill gaps across the three skill factors. On average, Core Employability Skills
contain a higher level of skills gap (0.98) compared to Professional Skills (0.92) and to
Communication Skills (0.77). Only the skill gap for Communication Skills is statistically
significantly different from the two others. Nevertheless, there are important skills gaps in
all three skill groups. Hence, there is no overall skill category where the graduates
particularly fall short. Employers ask for skill improvements across the gamut of skills.

Core Employability Skills remains the factor with the largest skill gap. The importance of
Core Employability Skills outweighs the higher satisfaction level, resulting in a higher skill
gap in this group of skills. In particular, the largest skill gaps are Reliability (1.22) and
Self-Motivated (1.10). We do not have a particular explanation why these two skills
display the highest level of skills gap.

Skill Gaps: Graduates Possess Strong English Communication Skills

The survey finds that institutions are doing very well meeting the demand for English
skills and that English communication is a crucially demanded skill. The skill gap in
English communication is by far the smallest among all the skills (0.31) (Table 7 and
Figure 2).However, the absence of skill gap does not mean that institutions should not
focus on English. The high importance of English imply that engineering education

                                                                                           23
institutions need to continue equipping graduates with a good command of the English
language. The importance of English communication for employability should be taken
into account when discussing language of instruction. Several States are discussing the
benefits of local language instruction. The government of Tamil Nadu, for instance, has
recently introduced Tamil as a medium of instruction in civic and mechanical engineering
courses. Further, students in some government colleges are allowed to take examinations
either in Tamil or in English or in both. The use of local language will remove an
important barrier for learning, since poor command of English is a barrier for many
students, in particular from rural areas, World Bank (forthcoming). However, the
importance that employers attach to English when hiring such should also be taken into
account, so that the engineering graduates will be employable upon graduation. In addition,
the critical comparative advantage of Indian engineers should not be lost during the course
of educational reforms at institutions because the importance of the good command in
English has been increasing in both the domestic and international markets.

Skill Gaps: Higher-Order Thinking Skills Are lagging

A closer assessment of the skill gaps tentatively suggests that the skill gaps are largest
within higher-order thinking skills, and smallest among the lower-order thinking skills. To
arrive at this finding, we map the Professional (cognitive) Skill into the Bloom‘s revised
taxonomy of cognitive skills. This taxonomy hieratically orders the level of cognitive
skills (Anderson and Krathwohl, 2001).

           Figure 3 Bloom’s revised Taxonomy
                                                                Using the McBearth
                                                                action verbs that have
                                                                been ascribed to each
                                                                thinking level, we classify
                                                                the Professional Skills
     Higher-order                                               and the Engineering-
    Thinking Skills                                             related skills that fit
                                                                poorly        in        the
                                                                Communication        Skills-
                                                                factor into either higher-
                                                                order thinking skills (the
                                                                top three cognitive skills
      Lower-order                                               in the revised Bloom‘s
     Thinking Skills                                            taxonomy:        analyzing,
                                                                evaluation, and creating)
                                                                or     the     lower-order
                                                                thinking     skills    (the
                                                                bottom-three      cognitive
                                                                skills in the revised
                                                                Bloom‘s         taxonomy:




                                                                                         24
remembering, understanding and applying).13 Table 8 presents the classified skills and the
importance and the skill gap as revealed by the employers.

 Table 8 Importance and Skill gap for Higher-Order and Lower-Order Thinking Skills

Higher-Order Skills                                                          Importance  Skill Gap
 Identify, formulate, and solve technical/engineering problems                      3.93        1.08
 Design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs                       3.84        0.89
 Use appropriate/modern tools, equipment, technologies to the specific job          4.08        0.93
 Creativity                                                                         4.07        0.99
 Design & conduct experiments, and analyze and interpret data                       4.01        0.99
     Average Higher-Order Skills                                                    3.98        0.97

Lower-Order skills                                                           Importance  Skill Gap
  Apply knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering                              4.07        0.85
  Knowledge of contemporary issues                                                  3.83        0.88
  Technical Skills (e.g. programming)                                               4.02        0.89
  Basic computer (e.g. word processing)                                             3.95        0.68
  Advanced computer (e.g. spreadsheets and databases)                               3.71        0.69
     Average Lower-Order skills                                                     3.90        0.77
Source: authors‘ calculation

The average skill gap for higher-order thinking skills is substantially higher 0.97 compared
to 0.77 for lower-order skills, a statistically significant difference at the 1% level. Further,
the importance level is higher 3.98 compared to 3.90 (also statistically significant at the
1% level). This simple analysis shows that Indian employers demand higher-order
thinking skills. It also indicates that the graduates are better at meeting the demand for
lower-order thinking skills, but they fall short in meeting the demand for higher-order
thinking skills. The reasons for demanding higher-order thinking skills are likely to be a
result of increased international and national competition, the pervasiveness of
technologies in today‘s world, the focus on increased quality products and innovation. As
skills acquired in school and workplace become obsolete more quickly in the globalization
era, higher order thinking skills and an ability to learn new and more complex skills are
indispensible to respond to accelerating technological change (Riboud and Tan, 2009).

While the above is only an indicative results, it is the first empirically-based evidence that
the Engineering education institutions and system does an inadequate job of developing
analytical, evaluating and creative engineers. The above result highlights a crucial question
for Indian engineering education; does the typical Indian engineering graduate sufficiently
learn higher-order thinking skills? Or does the education model (curriculum, teaching-
learning process and assessment) predominantly build lower-order thinking skills, such as
13
  Besterfiled-Sacre et al, 2000, shows how each EC2000 criteria can be dissected into skill elements that
belong to different levels of thinking orders. By using such a detailed mapping, a more detailed
approximation of the thinking-level of each required engineering skill could be established and the above
analysis would rest upon a more detailed analytical foundation. However, this dissection of each EC2000
criteria goes beyond the scope of this paper.
                                                                                                      25
remembering and understanding? Answering these questions require a larger employer
survey and possibly a competence assessment of engineering graduates. 14

Summary Analysis of Skill Gaps: The previous sections show that employers are likely to
perceive Soft Skills more important than Professional Skills. However, engineering
graduates with limited and weak Professional Skills are undesirable for employers. The
survey results, for instance, show a clear signal to the Problem Solving that is under
Professional Skills. As shown earlier, Problem Solving has the largest gap in Professional
Skills and the second least satisfying skill of all skills.

Wide gaps can be observed among almost all skills. This is more obvious for higher order
skills, such as Problem Solving that falls in Professional Skills. Further, the mean scores
of skill gaps in Professional Skills are higher than those in Soft Skills, which are 0.91 and
0.88 points, respectively. Therefore, the importance of Professional Skills should not be
disparaged.

6. Summary Findings and Policy Implications
Educating engineers with a comprehensive and deep set of skills that are in demand would
be of tremendous importance for the employability of individual engineers and for the
country‘s development. Large economic sectors, such as IT, infrastructure, power and
water, rely critically upon engineering skills and technologies. This employer survey
provides important new insight on which specific skills are important for employers and
where the graduates currently fall short. In what follows, we present the main findings and
the policy implications that we draw from each finding. However, it is important to keep
three caveats in mind: (i) the quality improvements in education lie squarely within the
scope of pedagogy, education policy and education management, which is outside of the
scope of this paper; (ii) the engineers evaluated by employers should be seen as the end
product of the entire education system, not just engineering education. The engineering
colleges receive graduates from the secondary education system with a set of skills upon
which they add. In particular, the Soft Skills are influenced by a prior schooling and the
family setting; and (iii) although the sample size is fairly large compared to similar
surveys, it is relatively small compared to the large population of Indian firms. Further, the
survey may be biased due to a small size of convenience sampling and a possible over-
sampling of large firms. Keeping these important caveats in mind, we limit the
recommendations to a set of broad actions within engineering education to improve the
skill set of future engineers.
There is substantial dissatisfaction with the quality of graduates. 64% of employers
are only somewhat satisfied or worse with the current engineering graduate skills. This
confirms the finding of a number of other surveys showing that the skills set of fresh
engineers is inadequate. Although, there are always caveats when comparing satisfaction
surveys internationally, we find that Indian employers are less satisfied with their
engineers compared to US employers. Obviously, the dissatisfaction suggests that renewed

14
  The same question should be posed as to graduates of other stream of higher education in India and to to
other levels of the education system. Clark, 2001 examines the culture of pedagogy in the primary and
secondary education system. She finds a pervasive focus of teaching and learning in India on lower order
thinking-typified by repetition and memorization-and the lack of attention given to the development of
higher-order thinking.
                                                                                                       26
efforts are necessary to raise the skill set of engineering graduates in India through an
improvement in the quality of engineering education. We particularly recommend that
each engineering program explicitly states and measures the desired learning outcomes
(the skill set of their graduate). The accreditation agency, NBA, in particular could have a
tremendously important impact if it increased the weight of graduates‘ learning outcomes
compared to other input-oriented accreditation criteria (such as classroom and curricula).
Also, while the results may appear gloomy, reforms and quality improvements programs
have successfully taken place at individual state and institutional level. There are several
success stories, see Annex 4 for the Technical Education Quality Improvement
Programme. What is required is a scale-up of the reforms and investments at the national
level addressing the shortcomings in the skill set of engineers.

The skills set of engineers can be characterized by three overall skills factors:
        (i) Core Employability Skills (which cover generic attitudinal and affective skills,
              such as reliability and team-work);
        (ii) Communication Skills (such as English skills, written and verbal
              communication), and
        (iii) Professional Skills (which generally covers cognitive skills related to the
              engineering professions, such as ability to apply engineering knowledge; as
              well as design and conduct experiments and related data analyze and
              interpretation).
These skill factors are similar to findings from other employer surveys. Core
Employability Skills and Communications Skills are often referred to as soft skills. The
factors also have important similarities with theoretical skill domains developed in the
educational literature. These three skill factors are therefore appropriate to use for further
analysis.

All three skills factors are important- Core Employability Skills, Communication Skills
and Professional Skills are important. Engineers that are in high demand possess all
three skills sets. Engineering education programs therefore have to put in place a
comprehensive quality upgrade of their programs.
However, while Professional Skills remain important, employers consider Soft Skills
(Core Employability Skills and Communication Skills) the most important skills.
Employers look for engineering graduates who show integrity, are reliable, can work well
in teams and are willing to learn.
Further, employers across India ask for a similar set of soft skills. Irrespective of the
size of the company, the economic sector, or the region, the above Soft Skills (integrity,
reliability, teamwork and willingness to learn) remain the important ones.
The policy implication is the need to improve the Soft Skills of graduates. This could come
about by: (i) Colleges and teachers recognizing that Soft Skills are important and include
soft skills as part of the desired learning objectives that teachers should foster in their
students. Technical knowledge and applicability are fundamental to engineering education;
however, they are not all. Student‘s soft skills need to be honed as well; (ii) The National
Accreditation Board could enhance the importance given to soft skills in the Program
Outcomes; For example, NBA does not explicitly include ―team working skills‖ as an
expected skill for an engineering graduate; (iii) The teaching-learning process could be
                                                                                           27
adjusted to include more project-work in teams and possibly received grades as a team;
and (iv) Introduce or scale-up specific courses providing students with opportunities to
enhance their English skills, communication skills or other forms of Soft Skills, for
example through finishing schools (courses for graduating students focusing on specific
skills in high demand).
The survey finds that colleges are doing very well meeting the demand for English
skills, since the graduates are rated in English. The skill gap in English communication
is the smallest among all the skills. Yet English communication is rated as the most
important communication skill and higher than any technical skill. Although we
understand the advantages of teaching in a local language, we recommend caution when
considering changing the language of instruction from English to a regional language,
because the change may put graduates from local language programs at a significant
disadvantage at the job-interview.
Graduates seem to lack higher-order thinking skills (analyzing, evaluating and
creating). The employers think that graduates are relatively strong in lower-order thinking
skills (knowledge and understanding), but fall short when it comes to the more complex
tasks such as application of appropriate tools to solve a problem, and analysis and
interpretation. Employers are less than ―Somewhat satisfied‖ with these skills. Further,
these higher-order thinking skills are the most important Professional Skills. In short,
memorizing textbooks for examinations is not a skill appreciated by the employers. This
raises a question of fundamental importance, whether the Indian engineering education
system overly trains students to memorize science and engineering knowledge, without
adequately emphasizing the applicability, analysis and out-of-the-box thinking that
employers look for. The Indian engineering firms increasingly require more analytical,
adaptive, and creative engineers to upgrade the country‘s infrastructure, to respond to
climate change and compete for higher value-added IT-orders on the global market.

Our recommendations to improve higher-order thinking skills are following. First of all,
we recommend that the question be further examined and debated given the importance.
Secondly, if the finding is true, which several qualitative studies suggest, major initiatives
are required to reform the system: (i) reshape assessment methods, especially exams at the
large affiliating universities, to assess higher-order thinking skills and not measure
memorized knowledge. This would require institutions to focus on learning rather than
memorization and mere understanding. In order to do so, curricula should be designed in a
way where students learn how to abstract out complex and practical issues within limited
time; (ii) reform curricula to increase the share of tasks where the student or a team of
students lead their own problem identification, experimenting, and solving using
engineering knowledge and methodologies; (iii) promote teaching-learning sessions where
students are actively learning and developing their own analytical and evaluating skills as
compared to simply listing and taking notes. This would most likely require significantly
increased academic autonomy of institutions, substantial professional development of the
teacher force and recruitment, and attention to instructional skills when recruiting teachers.

Employers ask for different Professional Skills depending upon their economic
sectors, the firm size and the region. To illustrate, IT companies, in general, demand
creativity and strong system design skills while the knowledge of mathematics, science,
and engineering are less important. On the other hand, the infrastructure firms prioritize
                                                                                        28
graduates with strong ability to use modern tools and the knowledge of mathematics,
science, and engineering, but focus less on creativity and system design skills.
This leaves an important role for institutions to prepare their graduates to meet the demand
for skills from different sectors. Institutions therefore have to increase their interaction
with various kinds of employers. Hence, the institutions should customize program
outcomes to meet the specific demand. Further, extra-curriculum activities such as
internships and involvement of institutions with community would also help students to
deepen the understanding of demanded skills and respond well to particular demanded
skills.




                                                                                         29
References
Academy For Educational Development, 2008.        Middle Technical College Employer
      Survey, AED, Washington DC, USA

Acock, Alan C., 2008, A Gentle Introduction to Stata, Second Edition, Stata Corp LP,
     Texas USA

Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (Eds.). 2001. A taxonomy for learning, teaching and
     assessing: A revision of Bloom's Taxonomy of educational objectives. New York:
     Longman.

Azam, Mehtabul & Aimee Chin & Nishith Prakash, 2010. The Returns to English-
     Language Skills in India. CReAM Discussion Paper Series 1002, Centre for
     Research and Analysis of Migration (CReAM), Department of Economics,
     University College London, UK.

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2001. Do People Mean What They Say?
      Implications For Subjective Survey Data. American Economic Review, American
      Economic Association, Pennsylvania, USA.

Biswas, Gautam, K.L. Chopra, C.S. Jha and D.V. Singh, 2010. Profile of Engineering
     Education in India: Status, Concerns and Recommendations. Indian National
     Academy of Engineering, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, Chennai, Mumbai,
     Kolkata

Bloom, B.S. (Ed.), Engelhart, M.D., Furst, E.J., Hill, W.H., & Krathwohl, D.R. 1956.
     Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of educational goals.
     Handbook 1: Cognitive domain. New York: David McKay.

Borghans, Lex, Angela Lee Duckworth, James J. Heckman, Bas ter Weel, 2008. The
     Economics And Psychology Of Personality Traits. Working Paper 13810, National
     Bureau Of Economic Research, Massachusetts, USA.

Chen, Derek H. C., Kishore Gawande, 2007, Underlying Dimensions of Knowledge
      Assessment: Factor Analysis of the Knowledge Assessment Methodology Data,
      World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4216, Washington DC, USA

Clark, Prema, 2001, Teaching and Learning, The Culture of Pedagogy, Sage Publications
       India Pvt Ltd, New Delhi, India

Gorsuch, Richard L., 1983, Factor Analysis (Second Edition), Lawrence ErlBaum
     Associates, Inc. New Jersey, USA

Hatcher, Larry, 1994, A Step-by-Step Approach to Using SAS for Factor Analysis and
      Structural Equation Modeling, SAS Institute Inc., North Carolina, USA



                                                                                    30
Hester, Yvette, 1996, Mathematical Models Underlying Common Factor Analysis: An
      Introductory Primer, Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC), USA

Hill, Roger B. & Gregory C. Petty, 1995, A New Look at Selected Employability Skills: A
       Factor Analysis of the Occupational Work Ethic, Journal of Vocational Education
       Research; Vol. 20, No. 4, pp. 59-73

Jae-on, Kim, and Charles W. Muller, 1978. Factor Analysis: Statistical Methods and
      Practical Issues. Sage Publications, CA, USA.

_________, 1978. Introduction to Factor Analysis: What It is and How to Do It. Sage
     Publications, CA, USA.

Kleinke, Joan, 2005. Noel-Levitz Employer Satisfaction Survey Utah University, Noel-
      Levitz Inc., Iowa, USA

Lattuca, Lisa R., Patrick T. Terenzini, J. Fredricks Volkwein, 2006. Engineering Change:
      A Study of the Impact of EC2000. Center for the Study of Higher Education, The
      Pennsylvania State University, ABET, inc., Maryland, USA.

Lee, Denis M. S., Eileen M. Trauth, Douglas Farwell, 1995, Critical Skills and Knowledge
      Requirements of IS Professionals: A Joint Academic/Industry Investigation, MIS
      Quarterly, Vol. 19, No. 3, Management Information Systems Research Center,
      University of Minnesota

Lynch, Scott M., 2003.             Multicollinearity (Soc 504).          Available    at
     http://www.princeton.edu/~slynch/SOC_504/multicollinearity.pdf

MHRD, Ministry of Human Resource Development, 1998-2008. Annual Report. New
   Delhi, India

Ministry of Power, Government of India, 2007. Agenda for the Seminar on Requirement
      and Availability of Highly Skilled Manpower for the Power Sector, New Delhi,
      India

NASSCOM and McKinsey, 2005. NASSCOM and McKinsey Report 2005: Extending
    India‘s Leadership of the Global IT and BPO Industries, NASSCOM and McKinsey,
    New Delhi, India

National Board of Accreditation, 2009. Evaluation Guidelines for NBA Accreditation of
      Undergraduate Engineering Programme. National Board of Accreditation, New
      Delhi, India.

National Knowledge Commission, 2008. Report of Working Group on Higher Education.
      New Delhi, India

Paranto, Sharon R., Mayuresh Kelker, 1999. Employer Satisfaction with Job Skills of
      Business College Graduates and Its Impact on Hiring Behavior. Journal of
                                                                                     31
      Marketing for Higher Education, Vol. 9(3), The Haworth Press, Inc., New York,
      USA.

Pett, Marjorie A., Nancy R. Lackey, John J. Sullivan, 2003. Making Sense of Factor
      Analysis, The use of factor analysis for instrument development in health care
      search. Sage Publications, Inc., California, USA.

Riboue, Michelle, Hong Tan, 2009. Improving Skills for Competitiveness, (p204-245
     Accelerating Growth And Job Creation In South Asia), World Bank, Washington
     DC, USA.

Torres-Reyna, Oscar. Getting Started in Factor Analysis (using Stata). Available at
      http://dss.princeton.edu/training/Factor.pdf

Thompson, Phyllis E., 2007. Central Ohio Technical College, Employer Satisfaction
    Survey & Employer Interviews. Central Ohio Technical College, Office of
    Institutional Planning & Human Resource Development, Newark, Ohio. Available
    at http://www.newarkcolleges.com/COTC/ResearchandPlanning/default.asp

Lujan, Sylvia S., Rios, Xavier ―Andy‖, 2001. Employer Satisfaction Survey, The
      University of Texas-Pan American, Office of Institutional Effectiveness, USA

Wadhwa, Vivek, Ben Rissing, AnnaLee Saxenian, Gary Gereffi, 2007. Education,
    Entrepreneurship and Immigration: America‘s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs, Part
    II. Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation; Duke School of Engineering, UC
    Berkeley School of Information.

Wadhwa, Vivek, Una Kim de Vitton, Gary Gereffi, 2008. How The Discipline Became
    The Guru. School of Engineering at Duke University, Harvard Law School, The
    Kauffman Foundation, USA

Washington Accord, Sydney Accord, Dublin Accord, Engineer Mobility Forum,
     Engineering Technologists, Mobility, Graduate Attributes and Professional
     Competencies, Ver 1.1-13, June 2005

World Bank, 2008. Indian Road Construction Industry, Capacity Issues, Constraints &
     Recommendations. World Bank, Washington DC, USA.

_________, 2009. Implementation Completion and Results Report (IDA-37180) on A
     Credit for a Technical/Engineering Education Quality Improvement Project. World
     Bank, Washington DC, USA

_________, 2009. India‘s Investment Climate, Voice of Indian Business, World Bank,
     Washington DC, USA.

_________, 2010. Project Appraisal Document: Second Technical/Engineering Education
     Quality Improvement Project. World Bank, Washington DC, USA.


                                                                                 32
_________, Forthcoming. Study on Strategies to Achieve Equity in Student Performance
     in Engineering in Karnataka and Gujarat. Ed. Neera Burra. World Bank,
     Washington DC, USA.




                                                                                 33
                               Annex 1: Procedures of Factor Analysis
1. Introduction
Factor analysis is a statistical procedure to find the latent variables (or factors) that
explains attributes underlying common variables in the matrix. In other words, it is ―to
identify the interrelationships among a large set of observed variables and then, through
data reduction, to group a smaller set of these variables into dimensions or factors that
have common characteristics (Nunnally & Bernstein, 1994)”.15 Therefore, it is sometimes
used as a data reduction technique.

Factor analysis is widely used in social science, especially in psychological researches and
business surveys. For instance, it has been used by personality psychologists to find out
major dimensions of people‘s personality that defines human personality. The most
prominent is probably the ―Big Five‖ personality inventory. The Big Five factors are
Openness, Conscientiousness, Extroversion, Agreeableness, and Neuroticism (OCEAN).
The Big Five model has been developed over the past 50 years in personality psychology,
and a strong consensus that these five factors represent an overall pattern of all personality
traits has emerged since early 1990s. Factor analysis is also extensively used in business
surveys, from employee/employer satisfaction surveys to customer satisfaction surveys, to
marketing research, and to analysis of stock market.

There are basically two types of factor analysis: exploratory and confirmatory.
Exploratory factor analysis ―is used when the researcher does not know how many factors
are necessary to explain the interrelationships among a set of characteristics, indicators,
or items (Gorsuch, 1983; Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Tabachnick & Fidell, 2001)‖16
Confirmatory factor analysis, on the other hand, is used when the researcher has a defined
idea of the structure or the number of dimensions underlying a set of variables. Given that
employer satisfaction survey is probably the first attempt in India, exploratory factor
analysis was applied for the data analysis. Since this paper discusses only exploratory
factor analysis, it will henceforth simply be named factor analysis.

Factor analysis normally takes three basic steps, preparing the relevant covariance matrix,
extracting initial factors, and rotating to a terminal solution (Kim and Mueller, 1978).
Therefore, the rest of this annex proceeds in the following way. Section 2 examines the
quality of correlation matrix and determines if it is factorable. Section 3 presents the
extraction method conducted. Section 4 discusses the selection of rotation methods of the
factor analysis. Section 5 briefly examines the internal consistency of the instrument by
using Cronbach‘s Coeeficient alpha. Section 6 discusses naming and interpreting the
factors and their limitations. Section 7 presents composition of factor scores.

2. Examine Correlation Matrix
Reviewing elementary characteristics of correlation matrices is critical for factor analysis
because the quality of matrices determines whether or not the matrices are factorable.


15
     Marjorie A. Pett, Nancy R. Lackey, John J. Sullivan, 2003. Making Sense of Factor Analysis.
16
     Ibid
                                                                                                   34
Bartlett‘s Test of Sphericity and Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Test (KMO) were used to evaluate
the strength of the liner association among 25 items in the correlation matrix.17
     a) Bartlett’s Test of Sphericity: This is to test the null hypothesis that correlation
        matrix is an identity matrix. An identity matrix is a matrix with 0‘s on the off-
        diagonal and a completely noncollinear, which is not factorable. The formula of
        the test is following;

                                                                              ….. (1)

         where

                          =calculated chi-square value for Bartlett‘s test
                       N=sample size
                       k=number of items or variables in the matrix
                            =natural logarithm
                       |R|=determinant of the correlation matrix

         The outcome below suggests that we reject the hypothesis above and conclude that
         our correlation matrix is not an identity matrix.

                                Bartlett test of sphericity
                              Chi-square          =          1875.263
                              Degrees of freedom =                300
                              p-value             =             0.000
                               H0: variables are not intercorrelated

     b) Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Test (KMO): KMO is a measurement of sampling adequacy
        that compares the magnitudes of the observed correlation coefficients to the
        magnitudes of the partial correlation coefficients.

                                                                        ….. (2)

         where




                          Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy
                          KMO = 0.860

         Evaluation of the size of KMO is characterized by Kaizer, Meyer, and Olkin as
         following:



17
  A skill, ―Accepts responsibility for consequences of actions‖, is dropped from the correlation matrix before
factor analysis proceeds since the skill is quite similar to ―Reliability‖.
                                                                                                           35
                          Above .90 is ―Marvelous‖
                          In the .80s is ―Meritorious‖
                          In the .70s is ―Middling‖
                          In the .60s is ―Mediocre‖
                          In the .50s is ―Miserable‖
                          Less than .40s is ―Don‘t Factor‖

According to Bartlett‘s test, the test is significant (                            ), which
indicates that the correlation matrix is not an identity matrix. The result of KMO statistics
(.86) is ―Meritorious‖ according to Kaizer‘s criteria, suggesting that we have a sufficient
sample size relative to the number of items in our scale. Given the results of the two tests
above, the correlation matrix appears to be factorable.

3. Extraction Method and Selection of the Number of Factors to Retain
The main objective of the extraction in factor analysis is to determine the minimum
number of common factors that would satisfactorily produce the correlations among the
observed variables (Kim and Mueller, 1978). There are about 7 extraction methods;
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), Principal Axis Factoring (PAF), Maximum
Likelihood Methods, Unweighted Least Squares, Generalized Least Squares, Alpha
Factoring, Image Factoring, etc. The first two methods, PCA and PAF, are served as base
models of factor analysis and most commonly used in factor analysis. Therefore, we will
focus on these two extraction methods, discuss differences of the two models, and then
finally decide which method is appropriate for our analysis.

Both methods are based on assumption that initial factors to be extracted from the
specified matrix are orthogonal or uncorrelated with one another (Pett, Lackey, Sullivan,
2003), and therefore they are a multivariate linear model.

The model of PCA is defined by the following equation:

                                                                  ….. (3)

      where

                      = standardized observed variable for k
                      = factor loadings (or standardized regression coefficient) of k on
                      = jth common factors

The model of PAF is slightly different from PCA, and it is defined by the following
equation:

                                                                    ….. (4)

      where

                      = standardized observed variable for k
                                                                                           36
                              = factor loadings (or standardized regression coefficient) of k on
                             = jth common factors
                                 = factor loading of k on its unique factor

As the formulas above show, the major difference between PCA and PAF is their
approaches to deal with the variances. While PAF includes all variances; common
variance, specific variance, and error variance, PCA partitions variances into shared
variance and unique variance, which is composed of specific and error variance.

There is no agreement among researches on which extraction method is better, and
therefore selection of extracting method in factor analysis is not easy. Both PCA and PAF
have advantages and disadvantages. While PCA is more commonly used by researchers
and useful especially when reducing a number of variables with a smaller number of
components (or factors), PAF provides a better estimate of correlations by separating out
error variances. (Pett, Lackey, and Sullivan, 2003) As a result, PCA tends to show the
estimate of correlations slightly higher than that of PAF. Because we do not know how
significant error of measurement from shared variance play a role in this exercise, it would
be safer to take into account (separate out) the error variance. Thus, PAF is selected as
extraction method.18 Table A1-1 below shows the result of the extraction.

       Table A1- 1: Factor loadings (pattern matrix) and unique variances (PAF)
                                  Factor       Eigenvalue      Difference    Proportion    Cumulative
                                  Factor1           8.059           5.610         0.577        0.577
                                  Factor2           2.449           1.069         0.175        0.753
                                  Factor3           1.379           0.485         0.099        0.851
                                  Factor4           0.894           0.285         0.064        0.915
                                  Factor5           0.609           0.090         0.044        0.959
                                  Factor6           0.519           0.092         0.037        0.996
                                  Factor7           0.427           0.090         0.031        1.027
                                  Factor8           0.337           0.062         0.024        1.051
                                  Factor9           0.275           0.067         0.020        1.071
                                  Factor10          0.208           0.078         0.015        1.086
                                  Factor11          0.130           0.033         0.009        1.095
                                  Factor12          0.097           0.040         0.007        1.102
                                  Factor13          0.057           0.062         0.004        1.106
                                  Factor14         -0.004           0.009         0.000        1.106
                                  Factor15         -0.013           0.034        -0.001        1.105
                                  Factor16         -0.047           0.006        -0.003        1.101
                                  Factor17         -0.053           0.027        -0.004        1.098
                                  Factor18         -0.080           0.031        -0.006        1.092
                                  Factor19         -0.110           0.013        -0.008        1.084
                                  Factor20         -0.123           0.033        -0.009        1.075
                                  Factor21         -0.156           0.020        -0.011        1.064
                                  Factor22         -0.176           0.004        -0.013        1.051
                                  Factor23         -0.180           0.079        -0.013        1.038
                                  Factor24         -0.260           0.016        -0.019        1.020
                                  Factor25         -0.276                .       -0.020        1.000


Var    Fctr1    Fctr2    Fctr3    Fctr4      Fctr5    Fctr6     Fctr7    Fctr8    Fctr9    Fctr10   Fctr11   Fctr12   Fctr13   Uniqueness
gi21    0.524   -0.223   -0.160    0.125     -0.159   -0.034     0.035   -0.157    0.016    0.026   -0.137    0.146    0.042     0.540
gi22    0.678   -0.058   -0.188    0.201     -0.221    0.211    -0.016   -0.023    0.021    0.031   -0.158   -0.051   -0.014     0.337


18
  PCA was also tried out. However, the factors extracted by PCA seemed mixing soft and Professional
Skills, and it was difficult to intuitively interpret the results, which is one of the important assessments of the
extracted factors.
                                                                                                                                     37
gi23      0.635   -0.002   -0.072    0.299   -0.130    0.095   -0.210   -0.150   -0.041    0.092    0.088   -0.052    0.008   0.388
gi24      0.598   -0.445    0.023   -0.217   -0.145    0.012    0.142    0.111    0.206    0.022   -0.001    0.023   -0.005   0.300
gi25      0.596   -0.510    0.019   -0.105   -0.174    0.088    0.133   -0.053    0.016    0.085    0.073   -0.017   -0.041   0.300
gi26      0.532   -0.486    0.170   -0.113   -0.093   -0.068   -0.103    0.135    0.200   -0.022    0.075   -0.039    0.043   0.347
gi27      0.649   -0.398   -0.012    0.104   -0.007   -0.002    0.008    0.229   -0.201    0.050   -0.048   -0.028    0.065   0.307
gi28      0.602   -0.062   -0.245    0.142    0.065   -0.201   -0.089    0.113   -0.131    0.153    0.059    0.111   -0.043   0.429
gi29      0.685   -0.264    0.113   -0.013    0.165    0.091   -0.050    0.024   -0.016   -0.109   -0.067   -0.088   -0.120   0.371
gi210     0.545   -0.298   -0.077    0.044    0.157    0.194    0.058    0.009   -0.145   -0.168    0.056    0.080   -0.019   0.482
gi211     0.623   -0.266   -0.014    0.139    0.180   -0.238    0.067   -0.134    0.065   -0.022    0.111    0.008   -0.005   0.394
si31      0.534    0.235   -0.323   -0.394    0.034    0.168    0.073   -0.093   -0.036   -0.003    0.020   -0.004    0.094   0.346
si32      0.531    0.213   -0.394   -0.446    0.075    0.037   -0.105    0.000   -0.075    0.050   -0.011   -0.076   -0.040   0.285
si33      0.561    0.341   -0.377   -0.119    0.106   -0.165    0.175    0.087    0.064   -0.025    0.006    0.026    0.022   0.330
si34      0.609    0.415   -0.291    0.187   -0.071    0.109   -0.002    0.043    0.072   -0.045    0.055   -0.001   -0.030   0.308
si35      0.642    0.259    0.378   -0.138   -0.238   -0.067    0.003   -0.035   -0.208   -0.039    0.078   -0.002    0.017   0.246
si36      0.609    0.199    0.434   -0.152   -0.116   -0.196   -0.033   -0.079   -0.073    0.034   -0.035   -0.059    0.031   0.307
si37      0.533    0.302    0.092   -0.064    0.125    0.083   -0.402    0.070    0.142    0.033    0.029    0.067    0.003   0.397
si38      0.576    0.319    0.359   -0.112   -0.075    0.012   -0.016    0.133   -0.015   -0.161   -0.066    0.116   -0.033   0.357
si39      0.263    0.193    0.404   -0.058    0.205    0.223    0.045   -0.045    0.081    0.208   -0.043    0.055    0.016   0.577
si310     0.354    0.120    0.243    0.098    0.294    0.073    0.229    0.104   -0.046    0.158   -0.006   -0.033   -0.016   0.609
si311     0.352    0.448    0.066    0.349   -0.035    0.176    0.127    0.130    0.061   -0.085    0.080   -0.049    0.072   0.459
si312     0.646    0.339    0.115    0.039   -0.010   -0.040    0.153   -0.253    0.072   -0.021    0.025    0.012   -0.058   0.354
si313     0.566    0.349   -0.084    0.156    0.017   -0.319    0.008    0.068    0.071    0.002   -0.114   -0.073   -0.002   0.397
si314     0.527   -0.365    0.067    0.057    0.354   -0.035   -0.102   -0.160    0.002   -0.115   -0.063   -0.032    0.087   0.393


After determining the extraction method, the number of factors to retain should be decided.
There are mainly three approaches:

Eigenvalues19 with more than 1.0. One of the ways to determine the number of factors to
retain is to select factors whose eigenvalues are more than 1.00 (Kaiser-Guttman rule).
Given this rule, it suggests that Factor 1, 2, and 3 in the Table A1-1 should be selected.

Percent of Variance Extracted. Another way is to examine the cumulative figures (the
last column of the top table in Table A1-1) and set a threshold where the figures reach
between 75 – 80%. The figures are accumulation of ―proportion‖ (next column on the left
of ―cumulative‖). The figures in proportion are calculated by dividing eigenvalue in a
given factor by the summation of the eigenvalues (13.962). For instance, the first
proportion 0.5772 is computed as following: 8.05851/13.962=0.5772 (rounded). This
suggests retaining the first two factors (Factor 1 and 2).

Scree Plot. The third method for determining the number of factors to retain is the Scree
Plot. This is visualization of the first method (eigenvalues), and Cattell (1966) suggests
retaining factors whose dropping level of eigenvalues is higher than that of going across in
the Scree Plot. In Figure A1-1 below, the first three factors show significant drops
compared to others which are more or less flat. Therefore, this method also recommends
retaining the first three factors. Given these three methods, it is determined that our factor
analysis model will keep three factors (Factor 1, 2, and 3) for further analysis.




19
     Eigenvalue is the amount of variance explained by each factor.
                                                                                                                                  38
                             Figure A1- 1: Scree Plot of Eigenvalues




4. Rotating Methods
Unrotated factors, e.g., Table A1-1 are often very difficult to have meaningful
interpretations. In order to make the unrotated factors more interpretable, those factors are
usually rotated for further analysis. Therefore, rotating factor is the next step after
determining the number of factors to be retained. Detail explanations of rotation are
beyond the scope of this paper, but the paper briefly explains the method applied for the
analysis and the reason why the method was selected.

There are basically two rotating methods, orthogonal and oblique factor rotations. While
the former is assumed that the generated factors are independent of each other
(uncorrelated), the latter is supposed to have some correlations between the factors. (Pett,
Lackey, and Sullivan, 2003) Especially in social science, it is unrealistic to assume that
the generated factors are completely independent. For instance in our study, Factor 1 has
higher correlations with core employability skills, Factor 2 shows more correlations with
Professional Skills, and Factor 3 is more related to communication skills.20 It intuitively
makes sense to assume that these three generated factors in our analysis (Core
Employability Skills, Professional Skills, and Communication Skills) may have some




20
  Table A1-1 does not clearly show this result. This is precisely why rotation is needed. Table 6 in Annex 2
shows more meaningful and interpretable results.
                                                                                                         39
correlations, however little. Therefore, the oblique factor rotation method was selected for
our analysis.21

5. Interpreting and naming Factors
The amount of the factor loadings for each skill is helpful for interpreting factors. It is
widely accepted that factor loadings less than 0.40 can be disregarded for interpretation of
the factors. Therefore, Table A2-2 in Annex 2 shows the rotated factors which are sorted
from highest to lowest and more than 0.40 in factor loadings.

The highest and the majority of factor loadings in Factor 1 are skills that are related to core
employability skills e.g., integrity, self-discipline, reliability, etc. Factor 2, on the other
hand, is dominated by Professional Skills with a few core employability skills whose
factor loading is relatively low. All three communication skills fall in Factor 3, and there
are skills related to the cognitive ability such as reading and analyzing and interpreting
data.

Taking into account these interpretations of the factors, each factor is named as follows:
Core employability skills (Factor 1), Professional Skills (Factor 2), and Communication
Skills (Factor 3).

However, as briefly described in the main text, naming factors requires careful thoughts.
It should be noted that the extracted factors do not necessarily truly exist in the real world,
and they are hypothetically created. Therefore, the names of factors subjectively describe
the multi dimensions of each factor.

6. Evaluation of the Internal Consistency of the Instrument (Cronbach’s Coefficient
   Alpha)
Before fully completing the factor analysis, it is important to assess the internal
consistency of the instrument. Cronbach‘s coefficient alpha is commonly used to measure
reliability of the instrument, and the formula is given as follows:




               where

                               = coefficient alpha
                               = number of items in the scale
                                  = sum of the variances of the items
                                =variance of the scales‘ composite score

21
   There are several different rotating methods under the oblique method. Promax is used for rotating factors.
It is one of the representative oblique methods and is widely used in social surveys. It is especially helpful
for large data sets.
                                                                                                          40
      Table A1-2 below presents alpha coefficients for the twenty five skills of the employer
      satisfaction survey. The reliability estimates presented in the last column ranged
      from .911 to .918 with a total scale coefficient alpha equal to .916. Since an >.8 is
      considered good reliability, the result of evaluating the internal consistency shows that our
      instrument is reliable enough.

                      Table A1- 2: Internal Consistency (Cronbach’s Coefficient)
                                                                                                    average
                                                                            item-test item-rest inter-item
                              Skills                            Obs   Sign correlation correlation covariance alpha
Flexibility                                                     153     +     0.532       0.483      0.165 0.914
Creativity                                                      153     +     0.669       0.624      0.159 0.911
Empathy                                                         153     +     0.651       0.606      0.160 0.911
Reliability                                                     153     +     0.602       0.557      0.162 0.913
Integrity                                                       153     +     0.587       0.544      0.163 0.913
Self-discipline                                                 153     +     0.535       0.485      0.164 0.914
Self-motivated                                                  153     +     0.665       0.626      0.161 0.912
Knowledge of contemporary issues                                153     +     0.596       0.542      0.161 0.913
Teamwork                                                        153     +     0.696       0.660      0.161 0.911
Willingness to learn                                            153     +     0.578       0.535      0.164 0.914
Understands and takes directions for work assignments           153     +     0.653       0.608      0.160 0.912
Apply knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering            150     +     0.577       0.525      0.162 0.913
Use appropriate/modern tools, equipment, technologies           150     +     0.551       0.499      0.163 0.914
Identify, formulate, and solve technical/engineering problems   150     +     0.613       0.561      0.160 0.913
Design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs    150     +     0.649       0.600      0.159 0.912
Design & conduct experiments, and analyze and interpret data    150     +     0.665       0.626      0.161 0.912
Written communication                                           150     +     0.629       0.588      0.162 0.912
Verbal communication                                            150     +     0.548       0.500      0.164 0.914
Reading                                                         150     +     0.606       0.559      0.162 0.913
Communication in English                                        150     +     0.308       0.253      0.171 0.917
Basic computer                                                  150     +     0.432       0.374      0.167 0.916
Advanced computer                                               150     +     0.407       0.332      0.166 0.918
Technical Skills                                                150     +     0.683       0.640      0.158 0.911
Customer Service Skills                                         150     +     0.607       0.549      0.159 0.913
Entrepreneurship Skills                                         151     +     0.541       0.499      0.166 0.914
Test scale                                                                                           0.162 0.916




                                                                                                        41
                              Annex 2: Tables and Figures

Table A2- 1: Descriptive Statistics of Companies by Size, Region, States, Sector, and
                                     Respondents
         Variable                                           N          %
         Size
          Large (Over 500 employees)                        79        50.3
          Medium (Between 100 and 500 employees)            37        23.6
          Small (Under 100 employees)                       39        24.8
          No response                                       2         1.3
         Total                                              157       100
         Region a
          Central                                           6         3.8
          East                                              12        7.6
          North                                             66        42.0
          South                                             30        19.1
          West                                              43        27.4
         Total                                              157       100
         States b
          Andhra Pradesh                                    8         5.1
          Bihar                                             1         0.6
          Goa                                               1         0.6
          Gujarat                                           14        8.9
          Haryana                                           13        8.3
          Jharkhand                                         2         1.3
          Karnataka                                         11        7.0
          Maharashtra                                       29        18.5
          New Delhi                                         43        27.4
          Orissa                                            1         0.6
          Rajasthan                                         3         1.9
          Tamil Nadu                                        6         3.8
          Uttar Pradesh                                     14        8.9
          West Bengal                                       7         4.5
          No response                                       4         2.6
         Total                                              157       100
         Sector
          Automobiles                                       7         4.5
          Biotech                                           4         2.6
          Cement                                            1         0.6
          Food Processing                                   6         3.8
          IT                                                16        10.2
          Industrial Electronics                            6         3.8
          Infrastructure                                    11        7.0

                                                                                   42
  Irrigation, Diary, Fertilizer, Agriculture   2     1.3
  Oil & Gas                                    7     4.5
  Other                                        53    33.8
  Paper                                        3     1.9
  Pharmaceutical                               3     1.9
  Power                                        20    12.7
  Real Estate                                  2     1.3
  Refinery, Chemicals                          6     3.8
  Steel                                        5     3.2
  Telecom                                      3     1.9
  Textile                                      2     1.3
 Total                                         157   100
 Firm Established with Foreign Capital
  Yes                                          31    19.8
  No                                           112   71.3
  Don‘t know                                   10    6.4
  No response                                  4     2.6
 Total                                         157   100

 Respondents
   Board Member                                5     3.2
   Business owner/partner                      23    14.6
   Colleagues of graduate‘s department         1     0.6
   GM - communications                         2     1.3
   Head/Manager of Human Resource departme     79    50.3
   Manger of graduate`s department             28    17.8
   President/V. President/Executives           13    8.3
   Other                                       2     1.3
   No response                                 4     2.5
 Total                                         157   100
a. Regions where headquarters locate
b. States where headquarters locate




                                                            43
                         Table A2- 2: Factor Pattern Matrix for Skills
                                                                       Core
                                                                                Profession Communic
                                                                   Employabi                                     22
                               Skills                                            al Skills   ation    Uniqueness
                                                                    lity Skills
                                                                                (Factor 2) (Factor 3)
                                                                   (Factor 1)
 Integrity                                                              0.83                                0.38
 Self-discipline                                                        0.78                                0.45
 Reliability                                                            0.76                                0.44
 Self-motivated                                                         0.74                                0.42
 Entrepreneurship Skills                                                0.65                                0.58
 Teamwork                                                               0.63                                0.45
 Understands and takes directions for work assignments                  0.59                                0.54
 Willingness to learn                                                   0.58                                0.61
 Flexibility                                                            0.49                                0.65
 Empathy                                                                0.33                                0.59
 Identify, formulate, and solve technical/engineering problems                      0.80                    0.43
 Design a system, component, or process to meet desired needs                       0.77                    0.37
 Use appropriate/modern tools, equipment, technologies                              0.73                    0.52
 Apply knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering                               0.67                    0.55
 Customer Service Skills                                                            0.51                    0.55
 Knowledge of contemporary issues                                                   0.45                    0.57
 Creativity                                                                         0.42                    0.50
 Written communication                                                                        0.74          0.40
 Design & conduct experiments, and analyze and interpret data                                 0.73          0.38
 Reading                                                                                      0.72          0.44
 Communication in English                                                                     0.59          0.73
 Technical Skills                                                                             0.50          0.45
 Verbal communication                                                                         0.42          0.62
 Basic computer                                                                               0.42          0.80
 Advanced computer                                                                            0.41          0.67
Extracted Method: Principle Axis Factoring
Rotation Method: Promax

                                   Table A2- 3: Importance Level
                               Skills                    N         Mean       Std. Dev.
                   Integrity                              153        4.48           0.66
                   Reliability                            153        4.42           0.69
                   Teamwork                               153        4.41           0.66
                   Willingness to learn                   153        4.40           0.64
                   Entrepreneurship                       151        4.35           0.59
                   Self-discipline                        153        4.26           0.71
                   Communication in English               150        4.26           0.62
                   Self-motivated                         153        4.22           0.69
                   Flexibility                            153        4.15           0.68
                   Understand/take directions             153        4.14           0.77
                   Responsibility                         150        4.11           0.68
22
  ―Uniqueness is the variance that is ‗unique‘ to the variable and not shared with other variables.‖ (Torres-
Reyna)
                                                                                                         44
          Use of modern tools              150        4.08       0.74
          Apply Knowledge Math/Sci/Engg    150        4.07       0.76
          Creativity                       153        4.07       0.77
          Written Communication            150        4.07       0.67
          Reading                          150        4.04       0.72
          Technical Skills                 150        4.02       0.79
          Experiments/data analysis        150        4.01       0.69
          Verbal Communication             150        4.00       0.68
          Basic computer                   150        3.95       0.71
          Problem solving                  150        3.93       0.81
          Empathy                          153        3.92       0.75
          System design                    150        3.84       0.82
          Contemporary issues              153        3.83       0.76
          Advanced computer                150        3.71       0.89
          Customer Service                 150        3.51       0.89


Table A2- 4: ANOVA – Importance Mean Scores of Communication in English
                           (Company Size)
             |          Summary of simean
 company_size|        Mean   Std. Dev.       Freq.
 ------------+------------------------------------
       Large |   4.3506494   .57961498          77
      Medium |   4.0833333   .73192505          36
       Small |   4.2571429   .56061191          35
 ------------+------------------------------------
       Total |   4.2635135   .62118481         148

                         Analysis of Variance
     Source              SS         df      MS            F     Prob > F
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Between groups      1.75479115      2   .877395577      2.31     0.1025
  Within groups      54.9681818    145   .379090909
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Total            56.722973    147   .385870564

 Bartlett's test for equal variances:     chi2(2) =     3.4147   Prob>chi2 = 0.181


Table A2- 5: ANOVA – Importance Mean Scores of Communication in English
                           (Foreign Capital)

 foreign_cap |          Summary of simean
        ital |        Mean   Std. Dev.       Freq.
 ------------+------------------------------------
   Dont know |           4   .81649658          10
          No |   4.2641509   .62185417         106
         Yes |   4.3666667   .55605342          30
 ------------+------------------------------------
       Total |   4.2671233   .62467753         146

                         Analysis of Variance
     Source              SS         df      MS            F     Prob > F
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Between groups      1.01175153      2   .505875765      1.30     0.2753
  Within groups      55.5704403    143   .388604477

                                                                                45
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Total           56.5821918    145   .390222012

 Bartlett's test for equal variances:        chi2(2) =     2.2316   Prob>chi2 = 0.328

Table A2- 6: ANOVA – Importance Mean Scores of Communication in English
                               (Sector)

                                   |          Summary of simean
                           sector2 |        Mean   Std. Dev.       Freq.
 ----------------------------------+------------------------------------
                       Automobiles |           4   .57735027           7
                                IT |   4.3333333   .48795004          15
            Industrial Electronics |         4.5   .54772256           6
                    Infrastructure |   3.9090909   .53935989          11
 Mining and quarrying Manufacturin |   4.3571429   .49724516          14
                         Oil & Gas |   4.2857143   .75592895           7
          Other service activities |   4.0714286   .61572793          14
                             Power |   4.3888889   .60768499          18
 ----------------------------------+------------------------------------
                             Total |   4.2391304   .58119931          92

                         Analysis of Variance
     Source              SS         df      MS            F     Prob > F
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Between groups      3.14749984      7   .449642835      1.37     0.2292
  Within groups      27.5916306     84   .328471793
 ------------------------------------------------------------------------
     Total           30.7391304     91   .337792642

 Bartlett's test for equal variances:        chi2(7) =     2.4924   Prob>chi2 = 0.928



                           Table A2- 7: Satisfaction Level
                       Skills                  N         Mean   Std. Dev.
        Communication in English              150        3.95     0.68
        Integrity                             153        3.50     0.88
        Teamwork                              153        3.46     0.81
        Entrepreneurship                      151        3.44     0.72
        Self-discipline                       153        3.37     0.86
        Willingness to learn                  153        3.37     0.91
        Basic computer                        150        3.34     0.95
        Flexibility                           153        3.29     0.77
        Responsibility                        150        3.25     0.88
        Apply knowledge Math/Sci/Engg         150        3.23     0.84
        Written Communication                 150        3.22     0.89
        Reliability                           153        3.20     0.93
        Verbal Communication                  150        3.17     0.83
        Empathy                               153        3.15     0.81
        Use of modern tools                   150        3.15     0.85
        Technical Skills                      150        3.13     0.82
        Self-motivated                        153        3.12     0.79
        Understand/take directions            153        3.12     0.95
        Reading                               150        3.08     0.92
        Creativity                            153        3.08     0.92
                                                                                   46
                Advanced computer                         150        3.03         0.93
                Experiments/data analysis                 150        3.02         0.90
                System design                             150        2.95         0.96
                Contemporary issues                       153        2.95         0.86
                Problem solving                           150        2.87         0.96
                Customer Service                          150        2.65         0.93


   Table A2- 8: T-test for differences in importance means of Soft and Professional
                                          Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meansoft |     153    4.154193    .0344562    .4261991    4.086118     4.222268
meantech |     153    3.894958    .0469839    .5811589    3.802132     3.987784
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     153    .2592348    .0366064    .4527964    .1869118     .3315579
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meansoft - meantech)                        t =   7.0817
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =       152

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                   Ha: mean(diff) != 0                      Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 1.0000                 Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0000                     Pr(T > t) = 0.0000
Note: meansoft refers to the mean of soft skills in importance level while meantech refers to that of
Professional Skills.


Table A2- 9: T-test for differences in importance means of Core Employability Skills
                                and Professional Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meancore |     153    4.274437    .0398547    .4929755    4.195696    4.353178
meantech |     153    3.894958    .0469839    .5811589    3.802132    3.987784
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     153    .3794792    .0423813    .5242274    .2957468    .4632116
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meancore - meantech1)                     t =   8.9539
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =      152

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                   Ha: mean(diff) != 0                      Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 1.0000                 Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0000                     Pr(T > t) = 0.0000

Note: meancore refers to the mean of Core Employability Skills in importance level while meantech refers to
that of Professional Skills.


   Table A2- 10: T-test for differences in importance means of Communication and
                                   Professional Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meancomm |     150      4.0075    .0394174    .4827629    3.929611    4.085389
                                                                                                        47
meantech |     150    3.909524    .0466064     .570809    3.817429     4.001619
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     150    .0979762    .0396727     .485889    .0195825     .1763699
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meancomm - meantech1)                       t =   2.4696
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =       149

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                    Ha: mean(diff) != 0                      Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 0.9927                  Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0147                     Pr(T > t) = 0.0073

Note: meancomm refers to the mean of Communication in importance level while meantech refers to that of
Professional Skills.


  Table A2- 11: T-test for differences in satisfaction means of Soft and Professional
                                         Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meansoft |     153    3.271729     .046479     .574914      3.1799     3.363557
meantech |     153    2.980859     .057682    .7134867    2.866897     3.094821
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     153    .2908698    .0299241    .3701408    .2317489     .3499907
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meansoft - meantech)                        t =   9.7202
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =       152

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                    Ha: mean(diff) != 0                      Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 1.0000                  Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0000                     Pr(T > t) = 0.0000
Note: meansoft refers to the mean of soft skills in satisfaction level while meantech refers to that of
Professional Skills.


   Table A2- 12: T-test for differences in satisfaction means of Core Employability
                             Skills and Professional Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meancore |     153    3.301017    .0495818    .6132927    3.203058    3.398975
meantech |     153    2.980859     .057682    .7134867    2.866897    3.094821
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     153    .3201577    .0331495     .410037    .2546644     .385651
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meancore - meantech)                      t =   9.6580
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =      152

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                    Ha: mean(diff) != 0                      Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 1.0000                  Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0000                     Pr(T > t) = 0.0000
Note: meancore refers to the mean of Core Employability Skills in satisfaction level while meantech refers to
that of Professional Skills


   Table A2- 13: T-test for differences in importance means of Communication and
                                   Professional Skills
Paired t test
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                                                                                                          48
Variable |     Obs        Mean    Std. Err.   Std. Dev.   [95% Conf. Interval]
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
meancomm |     150    3.241667    .0506069     .619805    3.141667     3.341667
meantech |     150     2.98381    .0583687    .7148678    2.868472     3.099147
---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------
    diff |     150    .2578571    .0373474    .4574104    .1840582     .3316561
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
     mean(diff) = mean(meancomm - meantech)                        t =   6.9043
 Ho: mean(diff) = 0                              degrees of freedom =       149

 Ha: mean(diff) < 0                    Ha: mean(diff) != 0                         Ha: mean(diff) > 0
 Pr(T < t) = 1.0000                  Pr(|T| > |t|) = 0.0000                        Pr(T > t) = 0.0
Note: meancomm refers to the mean of Communication in satisfaction level while meantech refers to that of
Professional Skills.


               Table A2- 14: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Sector (Soft Skills)

                 ITsoft    Powersoft      Autosoft     IEsoft      Infsoft     OGsoft      MMsoft      OSsoft
 ITsoft          1
 Powersoft       0.3754*   1
                 0.0387
 Autosoft        0.2204    0.118          1
                 0.2533    0.5541
 IEsoft          0.2196    0.5361*        0.3715       1
                 0.2549    0.0047         0.0631
 Infsoft         0.4055*   0.3104         0.7053*      0.3919*     1
                 0.0261    0.0911         0.0002       0.0406
 OGsoft          0.4188*   0.3918*        0.4140*      0.3360      0.4088*     1
                 0.0247    0.0363         0.0346       0.0876      0.0297
 MMsoft          0.3643*   0.2966         0.3935*      0.3106      0.4097*     0.3873*     1
                 0.0463    0.1071         0.0401       0.1068      0.0258      0.0398
 OSsoft          0.3089    0.2959         0.7811*      0.5363*     0.5746*     0.4909*     0.5178*     1
                0.097      0.1131        0.0001      0.0056      0.002        0.0099      0.0054
Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z scores
*Significant at 5%
ITsoft: IT, Powersoft: Power, Autosoft: Automobiles, IEsoft: Industrial Electronics, Infsoft: Infrastructure,
OGsoft: Oil&Gas, MMsoft: Mining and quarrying Manufacturing, OSsoft: Other service activities.

           Table A2- 15: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Sector (Professional Skills)

                 ITtech    Powert~h      Autotech     IEtech      Inftech     OGtech      MMtech      OStech
 ITtech          1
 Powertech       0.1952    1
                 0.6486
 Autotech        0.2712    0.0529        1
                 0.5211    1
 IEtech          0.5590    0.6547        0.0606       1
                 0.1438    0.0769        1

                                                                                                           49
 Inftech       0.1952      0.8095*       0.0529       0.6547      1
               0.6486      0.0163        1            0.0769
 OGtech        0.3904      0.7143*       0.0529       0.8729*     0.7143*     1
               0.2876      0.0355        1            0.0159      0.0355
 MMtech        0.5798      0.2057        0.2858       0.4125      0.3086      0.3086      1
               0.113       0.638         0.5084       0.3155      0.433       0.433
 OStech        0.5500      0.1952        0.4339       0.5590      0.1952      0.4880      0.0527      1
                0.1245    0.6486        0.2615     0.1438       0.6486       0.1716       1
Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z scores
*Significant at 5%
ITtech: IT, Powertech: Power, Autotech: Automobiles, IEtech: Industrial Electronics, Inftech: Infrastructure,
OGtech: Oil&Gas, MMtech: Mining and quarrying Manufacturing, OStech: Other service activities.

      Table A2- 16: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Size of Company (Soft Skills)
                                   |      Ssoft      Msoft      Lsoft
                      -------------+---------------------------------
                             Ssoft |     1.0000
                                   |
                                   |
                             Msoft |     0.5533*    1.0000
                                   |     0.0018
                                   |
                             Lsoft |     0.5762*    0.6821*    1.0000
                                   |     0.0011     0.0001
                                   |
                     Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z scores
                     *Significant at 5%
                     Ssoft: Small Company, Msoft: Medium Company, Lsoft: Large Company.


 Table A2- 17: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Size of Company (Professional Skills)
                                   |      Stech      Mtech      Ltech
                      -------------+---------------------------------
                             Stech |     1.0000
                                   |
                                   |
                             Mtech |     0.8230*    1.0000
                                   |     0.0187
                                   |
                             Ltech |     0.3086     0.4286     1.0000
                                   |     0.4330     0.2296
                                   |
                     Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z scores
                     *Significant at 5%
                     Stech: Small Company, Mtech: Medium Company, Ltech: Large Company.


            Table A2- 18: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Region (Soft Skills)
                    |      Csoft      Esoft      Nsoft      Ssoft      Wsoft
       -------------+-------------------------------------------------------
              Csoft |     1.0000
                    |
                    |
              Esoft |     0.4678*    1.0000
                    |     0.0135
                                                                                                          50
             |
       Nsoft |     0.4624*    0.6421*    1.0000
             |     0.0126     0.0003
             |
       Ssoft |     0.4512*    0.5171*    0.6954*                        1.0000
             |     0.0155     0.0041     0.0001
             |
       Wsoft |     0.3497     0.5900*    0.6865*                        0.5449*   1.0000
             |     0.0612     0.0010     0.0001                         0.0021
          Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z                     scores
          *Significant at 5%
          Csoft: Central, Esoft: East, Nsoft: North, Ssoft: South, Wsoft: West


Table A2- 19: Kendall’s Rank Correlation by Region (Professional Skills)
             |      Ctech      Etech      Ntech      Stech      Wtech
-------------+-------------------------------------------------------
       Ctech |     1.0000
             |
             |
       Etech |     0.6928     1.0000
             |     0.0678
             |
       Ntech |     0.5071     0.7807*    1.0000
             |     0.1884     0.0227
             |
       Stech |     0.5774     0.4500     0.3904     1.0000
             |     0.1352     0.2191     0.2876
             |
       Wtech |     0.5071     0.7807*    0.6190     0.5855     1.0000
             |     0.1884     0.0227     0.0715     0.0947
             |
          Upper row: tau-B, Lower row: p-value of z scores
          *Significant at 5%
          Ctech: Central, Etech: East, Ntech: North, Stech: South, Wtech: West




                                                                                           51
                                 Annex 3: Employer Satisfaction Questionnaire

                            Questionnaires for Employer Satisfaction Survey


1. OVERALL SATISFACTION




                                                                                                       Somewhat
                                                                                    Extremely




                                                                                                                             Not at all
                                                                                                                  Not Very
                                                                                                Very
Overall, are you satisfied with the newly graduated engineers that you have hired
in the last 4 years (only consider hires for whom this was their first job after
graduation)




                                                                                                                                          52
2. GENERAL SKILLS
  Rate IMPORTANCE for successful                                                                                                        Rate SATISFACTION with this
        performance of the job                                                                                                               employee’s qualities


                     Somewhat




                                                                                                                                                    Somewhat
  Extremely




                                                                                                                                 Extremely
                                                                                   CRITERIA




                                           Not at all




                                                                                                                                                                          Not at all
                                Not Very




                                                                                                                                                               Not Very
              Very




                                                                                                                                             Very
                                                                                      Flexibility
                                                                               (responds well to change)
                                                                                      Creativity
                                                                      (identifies new approaches to problems)
                                                                                       Empathy
                                                             (understands the situations, feelings, or motives of others)
                                                                                      Reliability
                                                               (can be depended on to complete work assignments)
                                                                                       Integrity
                                                        (understands/applies professional and ethical principles to decisions)
                                                                                    Self-discipline
                                                                        (exhibits control of personal behavior)
                                                                                    Self-motivated

                                                                       Knowledge of contemporary issues

                                                                                  Teamwork
                                                                         (interpersonal relationships)
                                                                             Willingness to learn
                                                                              (Life-long learning)
                                                            Understands and takes directions for work assignments

                                                              Accepts responsibility for consequences of actions

 COMMENTS




                                                                                                                                                                                       53
3. SPECIFIC SKILLS
  Rate IMPORTANCE for successful                                                                                                   Rate SATISFACTION with this
        performance of the job                                                                                                       employee’s general skills

                                                                                 CRITERIA
                     Somewhat




                                                                                                                                               Somewhat
  Extremely




                                                                                                                           Extremely
                                           Not at all




                                                                                                                                                                     Not at all
                                Not Very




                                                                                                                                                          Not Very
              Very




                                                                                                                                       Very
                                                        Ability to apply knowledge of mathematics, science, engineering
                                                         Ability to use appropriate and modern tools, equipment, and
                                                                        technologies specific to their jobs
                                                                                (other than computers)
                                                         Ability to identify, formulate, and solve technical/engineering
                                                                                       problems
                                                          Ability to design a system, component, or process to meet
                                                                                    desired needs
                                                        Ability to design and conduct experiments, as well as to analyze
                                                                                  and interpret data
                                                                            Written communication

                                                                            Verbal communication

                                                                                    Reading

                                                                          Communication in English
                                                                                  Basic computer
                                                                              (e.g., word-processing)
                                                                               Advanced computer
                                                                         (e.g., spreadsheets, databases)
                                                                                  Technical Skills
                                                                                (e.g., programming)
                                                                            Customer Service Skills

                                                                            Entrepreneurship Skills

 COMMENTS


                                                                                                                                                                                  54
4. CHARACTERISTIC OF EMPLOYER
A. What is the legal status of the firm?     B. Was your firm established with      C. What is the approximate size of your            D. Which states/union
                                                participation of foreign capital?      company?                                           territories does your
  1. Joint Stock Company                                                                                                                  headquarter locate? (the
  2. Joint stock company with state          1. Yes                                 1. Large (over 500 employees)                         biggest branch for
     participation                           2. No                                  2. Medium (between 100 and 500 employees)             multinational companies)
  3. Corporation represented in stock        3. Don’t know                          3. Small (under 100 employees)
     exchange
  4. Limited liability partnership LLP
  5. Production Cooperative
  6. Private entrepreneur/family business
  7. State enterprise (various types)
  8. Other (Specify)




E. What is your job title?                                                             F. How many employees were hired last year?

  1. Board member
  2. Manger of graduate’s department
  3. Supervisor of graduate’s department
  4. Colleagues of graduate’s department
  5. Head/Manager of Human Resource department
  6. Business owner/partner
  7. Other (please specify)



G. Please specify the major economic activity of your firm
                                                                                    11. Real estate activities
 1.    Agriculture, forestry and fishing                                            12. Professional, scientific and technical activities
 2.    Mining and quarrying Manufacturing                                           13. Administrative and support service activities
 3.    Electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning supply                          14. Public administration and defense; compulsory social security
 4.    Water supply; sewerage, waste management and remediation activities          15. Education
 5.    Construction                                                                 16. Human health and social work activities
 6.    Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles and motorcycles         17. Arts, entertainment and recreation
 7.    Transportation and storage                                                   18. Other service activities
 8.    Accommodation and food service activities                                    19. Activities of households as employers; undifferentiated goods- and services-
 9.    Information and communication                                                    producing activities of households for own use
 10.   Financial and insurance activities                                           20. Activities of extraterritorial organizations and bodies




                                                                                                                                                                       55
H. Which sector does your company belong to                    J. Which region does your company fall in

    1.    Oil & Gas                                            1. East
    2.    Power                                                2. West
    3.    Automobiles                                          3. Central
    4.    Steel                                                4. North
    5.    Pharma                                               5. South
    6.    Industrial Electronics
    7.    IT
    8.    Infrastructure
    9.    Food Processing
    10.   Cement
    11.   Biotech
    12.   Paper
    13.   Real Estate
    14.   Telecom
    15.   Irrigation, Dairy
    16.   Refinery, Chemicals
    17.   Other

I. What is the annual turnover of your company in Rs crores?

    1. Less than 100 cr
    2. Between 100-500 cr
    3. 500-1000 cr




                                                                                                           56 | P a g e
             Annex 4. TEQIP Institutions as Leaders in Technical Education
Some of the survey results may look gloomy. However, reforms and investment into quality,
learning outcomes, and employability have been implemented successfully at the state and
institutional level. One such example is the Technical Education Quality Improvement
Program (TEQIP). This employer survey was conducted as part of the preparation process for
the second phase of TEQIP (TEQIP-II). The authors of this Working Paper are the Task
Team Leader and a team member of TEQIP-II.
TEQIP is a national program of the Government of India (GoI) with co-financing from the
World Bank and a key part of the 11th Five-Year Plan of the GoI. It envisages a long-term
(about 10-12 years) development of the technical education in the country and implements in
three phases for transformation of the technical education system.
To spearhead a set of reforms and investments, Government of India competitively selected
127 promising institutions as future leaders of the technical/engineering sector in the country,
in addition to India Institutes of Technology. This first phase of TEQIP was successfully
completed in 2009 with strong results in improved employability of students and quality of
education:
a) More than 40 of the supported institution gained academic autonomy which allowed them
   to continuously improve curriculum, teaching and assessment according to demand for
   skills and newest research,
b) Campus placement rates nearly doubled for undergraduate students from 41% to76% and
   more than doubled from 25% to 56% for post-graduate students,
c) Course offerings were restructured, modernized and vastly expanded in line with
   employer expectations.
d) Ninety-three percent of 811 Bachelor courses were accredited or in the process of
   accreditation
e) 220,000 students from disadvantaged backgrounds were assisted through provision of
   remedial teaching, workshops and establishment of ―book banks.‖
f) Enrolment in Master and PhD programs increased 50% and 69% respectively from 2002,
g) 30,000 faculty and 13,000 staff underwent training and professional development.
h) Professional publications increased from 3,800 to 6,328 per year,
i) Patents obtained and applied for increased from 22 to 34 per year, and 86 per year,
j) More than 1,887 programs were conducted to support the local community and workers
   benefitting nearly 180,000 people and transferring 1,228 technologies to the community.
Given the success, a second phase of TEQIP was launched in 2010 to scale-up reforms and
investments. About 120 new institutions to the program will be competitively selected to
improve learning outcomes and employability of graduates taking into account the findings of
this paper as well as feedback from local employers and strategic institutional development
plans. Further, approximately 80 institutions will be competitively selected to scale-up post-
graduate education and improving research, development, and innovation.


                                                                                    57 | P a g e
When implemented broadly and consistently across the country, the above reforms and other
government initiatives will improve upon the skills gaps identified in this employer survey.
Further, the TEQIP program will continue to monitor employer satisfaction in order to track
employer satisfaction and ensure feedback into the engineering education system.




                                                                                58 | P a g e
